ADVERSE REACTIONS




Herpes Simplex:




Short-Term Administration:

The most frequent adverse events reported during clinical trials of treatment of genital herpes with acyclovir 200mg administered orally 5 times daily every 4 hours for 10 days were nausea and/or vomiting in 8 of 298 patient treatments (2.7%). Nausea and/or vomiting occurred in 2 of 287 (0.7%) patients who received placebo.







Long-Term Administration:

The most frequent adverse events reported in a clinical trial for the prevention of recurrences with continuous administration of 400mg (two 200-mg capsules) 2 times daily for 1 year in 586 patients treated with acyclovir were nausea (4.8 %) and diarrhea (2.4 %).The 589 control patients receiving intermittent treatment of recurrences with acyclovir for 1 year reported diarrhea (2.7%), nausea (2.4 %), and headache (2.2%).









Herpes Zoster:

The most frequent adverse event reported during 3 clinical trials of treatment of herpes zoster (shingles) with 800mg of oral acyclovir 5 times daily for 7 to 10 days in 323 patients was malaise (11.5%). The 323 placebo recipients reported malaise (11.1%).







Chickenpox:

The most frequent adverse event reported during 3 clinical trials of treatment of chickenpox with oral acyclovir at doses of 10 to 20mg/kg 4 times daily for 5 to 7 days or 800mg 4 times daily for 5 days in 495 patients was diarrhea (3.2%). The 498 patients receiving placebo reported diarrhea (2.2%).







Observed During Clinical Practice:

In addition to adverse events reported from clinical trials, the following events have been identified during post-approval use of acyclovir. Because they are reported voluntarily from a population of unknown size, estimates of frequency cannot be made. These events have been chosen for inclusion due to either their seriousness, frequency of reporting, potential causal connection to acyclovir, or a combination of these factors.





General:

Anaphylaxis, angioedema, fever, headache, pain, peripheral edema.







Nervous:

Aggressive behavior, agitation, ataxia, coma, confusion, decreased consciousness, delirium, dizziness, dysarthria, encephalopathy, hallucinations, paresthesia, psychosis, seizure, somnolence, tremors. These symptoms may be marked, particularly in older adults or in patients with renal impairment (see
 
  PRECAUTIONS).

 







Digestive:

Diarrhea, gastrointestinal distress, nausea.







Hematologic and Lymphatic:

Anemia, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, leukopenia, lymphadenopathy, thrombocytopenia.







Hepatobiliary Tract and Pancreas:

Elevated liver function tests, hepatitis, hyperbilirubinemia, jaundice.







Musculoskeletal:

Myalgia.







Skin:

Alopecia, erythema multiforme, photosensitive rash, pruritus, rash, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, urticaria.







Special Senses:

Visual abnormalities.







Urogenital:

Renal failure, renal pain (may be associated with renal failure), elevated blood urea nitrogen, elevated creatinine, hematuria (see
 
  WARNINGS).
WARNINGS
PRECAUTIONS
OVERDOSAGE