6 ADVERSE REACTIONS

The following serious adverse reactions are described elsewhere in other sections of the labeling:


•Myocardial Ischemia, Myocardial Infarction, and Prinzmetal’s Angina [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]


•Arrhythmias [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]


•Chest, Throat, Neck, and/or Jaw Pain/Tightness/Pressure [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)]


•Cerebrovascular Events [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]


•Other Vasospasm Reactions [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)]


•Medication Overuse Headache [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)]


•Serotonin Syndrome [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)]


•Increases in Blood Pressure [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8)]


•Hypersensitivity Reactions [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.8)]









•Most common adverse reactions (≥2% and >placebo) were dizziness, headache, paresthesia, dry mouth, dyspepsia, fatigue, hot or cold sensation, chest pain, skeletal pain, and flushing  (6.1)


To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA at 1 (888) 721-7115 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.








6.1 Clinical Trials Experience

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.
Frovatriptan was evaluated in four randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, short-term trials. These trials involved 2392 patients (1554 on frovatriptan 2.5 mg and 838 on placebo). In these short-term trials, patients were predominately female (88%) and Caucasian (94%) with a mean age of 42 years (range 18 to 69).The treatment-emergent adverse events that occurred most frequently following administration of frovatriptan 2.5 mg (i.e., in at least 2% of patients), and at an incidence ≥1% greater than with placebo, were dizziness, paresthesia, headache, dry mouth, fatigue, flushing, hot or cold sensation, dyspepsia, skeletal pain, and chest pain. In a long-term, open-label study where 496 patients were allowed to treat multiple migraine attacks with frovatriptan 2.5 mg for up to 1 year, 5% of patients (n=26) discontinued due to treatment-emergent adverse events.
Table 1 lists treatment-emergent adverse events reported within 48 hours of drug administration that occurred with frovatriptan 2.5 mg at an incidence of ≥2% and more often than on placebo, in the four placebo-controlled trials. The events cited reflect experience gained under closely monitored conditions of clinical trials in a highly selected patient population. In actual clinical practice or in other clinical trials, these incidence estimates may not apply, as the conditions of use, reporting behavior, and the kinds of patients treated may differ.

                                                    Table 1: Adverse Reactions Reported within 48 Hours (Incidence ≥2% and Greater Than Placebo) of  Patients in Four Pooled Placebo-Controlled Migraine Trials








Adverse Reactions


Frovatriptan 2.5 mg

(n=1554)


Placebo

(n=838)







Central & peripheral nervous system


   Dizziness 
   Headache
   Paresthesia


8%
4%
4%


5%
3%
2%





Gastrointestinal system disorders


  Dry mouth
  Dyspepsia


3%
2%


1%
1%





Body as a whole – general disorders


  Fatigue
  Hot or cold sensation
  Chest pain


5%
3%
2%


2%
2%
1%





Musculo-skeletal

  Skeletal pain


3%


2%





Vascular

  Flushing


4%


2%




The incidence of adverse events in clinical trials did not increase when up to 3 doses were used within 24 hours. The incidence of adverse events in placebo-controlled clinical trials was not affected by gender, age, or concomitant medications commonly used by migraine patients. There were insufficient data to assess the impact of race on the incidence of adverse events.


Other Events Observed in Association with the Administration of Frovatriptan


The incidence of frequently reported adverse events in four placebo-controlled trials are presented below. Events are further classified within body system categories. Frequent adverse events are those occurring in at least 1/100 patients.

Central and peripheral nervous system: dysesthesia and hypoesthesia. 

Gastrointestinal: vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhea. 

Body as a whole: pain. 

Psychiatric: insomnia and anxiety. 

Respiratory: sinusitis and rhinitis. 

Vision disorders: vision abnormal. 

Skin and appendages: sweating increased. 

Hearing and vestibular disorders: tinnitus. 

Heart rate and rhythm: palpitation. 








6.2 Postmarketing Experience

The following adverse reactions were identified during post approval use of frovatriptan. Because these events are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure.

Central and peripheral nervous system:  Seizure.
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS






•Myocardial ischemia/infarction or Prinzmetal’s angina:  Perform cardiac evaluation in patients with multiple cardiovascular risk factors (5.1)

•Arrhythmias: Discontinue frovatriptan succinate if occurs (5.2)

•Chest/throat/neck/jaw pain, tightness, pressure, or heaviness: Generally not associated with myocardial ischemia; evaluate high risk patients for coronary artery disease (5.3)

•Cerebral hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and stroke: Discontinue frovatriptan succinate if occurs (5.4)

•Gastrointestinal ischemic reactions and peripheral vasospastic reactions: Discontinue frovatriptan succinate if occurs (5.5)

•Medication overuse headache: Detoxification may be necessary (5.6)

•Serotonin syndrome: Discontinue frovatriptan succinate if occurs (5.7, 7.3)








5.1 Myocardial Ischemia, Myocardial Infarction, and Prinzmetal’s Angina

Frovatriptan succinate tablets are contraindicated in patients with ischemic or vasospastic CAD. There have been rare reports of serious cardiac adverse reactions, including acute myocardial infarction, occurring within a few hours following administration of frovatriptan. Some of these reactions occurred in patients without known CAD. Frovatriptan may cause coronary artery vasospasm (Prinzmetal’s angina), even in patients without a history of CAD.
Perform a cardiovascular evaluation in triptan-naïve patients who have multiple cardiovascular risk factors (e.g., increased age, diabetes, hypertension, smoking, obesity, strong family history of CAD) prior to receiving frovatriptan. Do not administer frovatriptan if there is evidence of CAD or coronary artery vasospasm [see Contraindications (4)]. For patients with multiple cardiovascular risk factors who have a negative cardiovascular evaluation, consider administrating the first frovatriptan dose in a medically-supervised setting and performing an electrocardiogram (ECG) immediately following frovatriptan administration. For such patients, consider periodic cardiovascular evaluation in intermittent long-term users of frovatriptan.








5.2 Arrhythmias

Life-threatening disturbances of cardiac rhythm including ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation leading to death have been reported within a few hours following the administration of 5-HT1 agonists.  Discontinue frovatriptan if these disturbances occur.  Frovatriptan succinate tablets are contraindicated in patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome or arrhythmias associated with other cardiac accessory conduction pathway disorders [see Contraindications (4)].









5.3 Chest, Throat, Neck, and Jaw Pain/Tightness/Pressure

Sensations of pain, tightness, pressure, and heaviness have been reported in the chest, throat, neck, and jaw after treatment with frovatriptan and are usually non-cardiac in origin.  However, perform a cardiac evaluation if these patients are at high cardiac risk.  The use of frovatriptan succinate tablets are contraindicated in patients with CAD and those with Prinzmetal’s angina [see Contraindications (4)].








5.4 Cerebrovascular Events

Cerebral hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, stroke, and other cerebrovascular events have been reported in patients treated with 5-HT1 agonists, and some have resulted in fatalities. In a number of cases, it appears possible that the cerebrovascular events were primary, the agonist having been administered in the incorrect belief that the symptoms experienced were a consequence of migraine, when they were not. 
Before treating headaches in patients not previously diagnosed as migraineurs, and in migraineurs who present with symptoms atypical of migraine, other potentially serious neurological conditions need to be excluded. Frovatriptan succinate tablets are contraindicated in patients with a history of stroke or TIA [see Contraindications (4)].









5.5 Other Vasospasm Reactions

Frovatriptan, may cause non-coronary vasospastic reactions, such as peripheral vascular ischemia, gastrointestinal vascular ischemia and infarction (presenting with abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea), splenic infarction, and Raynaud’s syndrome. In patients who experience symptoms or signs suggestive of a vasospastic reaction following the use of any 5-HT1 agonist, rule out a vasospastic reaction before using frovatriptan [see Contraindications (4)].
Reports of transient and permanent blindness and significant partial vision loss have been reported with the use of 5-HT1 agonists. Since visual disorders may be part of a migraine attack, a causal relationship between these events and the use of 5-HT1 agonists have not been clearly established.








5.6  Medication Overuse Headache

Overuse of acute migraine drugs (e.g., ergotamine, triptans, opioids, or combination of these drugs for 10 or more days per month) may lead to exacerbation of headache (medication overuse headache). Medication overuse headache may present as migraine-like daily headaches or as a marked increase in frequency of migraine attacks. Detoxification of patients, including withdrawal of the overused drugs, and treatment of withdrawal symptoms (which often includes a transient worsening of headache) may be necessary.








5.7 Serotonin Syndrome

Serotonin syndrome may occur with frovatriptan, particularly during co-administration with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors [see Drug Interactions (7.3)]. Serotonin syndrome symptoms may include mental status changes (e.g., agitation, hallucinations, coma), autonomic instability (e.g., tachycardia, labile blood pressure, hyperthermia), neuromuscular aberrations (e.g., hyperreflexia, incoordination), and/or gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., nausea, vomiting, diarrhea). The onset of symptoms usually occurs within minutes to hours of receiving a new or a greater dose of a serotonergic medication. Discontinue frovatriptan if serotonin syndrome is suspected. 








5.8 Increase in Blood Pressure

Significant elevation in blood pressure, including hypertensive crisis with acute impairment of organ systems, has been reported on rare occasions in patients treated with 5-HT1 agonists, including patients without a history of hypertension.  Monitor blood pressure in patients treated with frovatriptan. Frovatriptan succinate tablets are contraindicated in patients with uncontrolled hypertension [see Contraindications (4)].









5.9 Hypersensitivity Reactions 

There have been reports of reactions including anaphylaxis and angioedema, in patients receiving frovatriptan. Such reactions can be life threatening or fatal.  In general, anaphylactic reactions to drugs are more likely to occur in individuals with a history of sensitivity to multiple allergens.  Frovatriptan succinate tablets are contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersensitivity reaction to frovatriptan [see Contraindications (4)].
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS






• Pregnancy: Based on animal data, may cause fetal harm (8.1)








8.1 Pregnancy


Risk Summary

There are no adequate data on the developmental risk associated with the use of frovatriptan in pregnant women. In animal studies, frovatriptan produced developmental toxicity (embryofetal lethality, fetal abnormalities, and decreased embryofetal growth) when administered to pregnant rats and rabbits at doses greater than those used clinically [see Animal Data]. 
In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and of miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2% to 4% and 15% to 20%, respectively. The reported rate of major birth defects among deliveries to women with migraine ranged from 2.2% to 2.9% and the reported rate of miscarriage was 17%, which were similar to rates reported in women without migraine. 

Clinical Considerations 


Disease-Associated Maternal and/or Embryo/Fetal Risk 

Published data have suggested that women with migraines may be at increased risk of preeclampsia during pregnancy. 

Data 


Animal Data 

When pregnant rats were administered frovatriptan (oral doses of 0, 100, 500, or 1000 mg/kg/day) throughout organogenesis, increased embryofetal mortality and an increased incidence of fetal malformations were observed at the high dose; decreased fetal body weights and increased incidences of fetal structural variations associated with growth impairment were observed at all doses. The lowest effect dose for embryofetal developmental toxicity in rats (100 mg/kg/day) is approximately 130 times the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD) of 7.5 mg/day on a body surface area (mg/m2) basis. 
When pregnant rabbits were administered frovatriptan (oral doses of 0, 5, 20, or 80 mg/kg/day) throughout organogenesis, embryofetal mortality was increased at the mid and high doses. The no-effect dose for embryofetal developmental toxicity in rabbits (5 mg/kg/day) is approximately 13 times the MRHD on a mg/m2 basis. 
Oral administration of frovatriptan (0, 100, 500, or 1000 mg/kg/day) to female rats throughout pregnancy and lactation resulted in increased embryofetal mortality at the high dose. The no effect dose for pre- and postnatal developmental toxicity in rats (500 mg/kg/day) is approximately 650 times the MRHD on a mg/m2 basis.








8.2 Lactation 


Risk Summary 

There are no data on the presence of frovatriptan in human milk, the effects of frovatriptan on the breastfed infant, or the effects of frovatriptan on milk production. In rats, oral dosing with frovatriptan resulted in levels of frovatriptan and/or its metabolites in milk up to four times higher than in plasma. 
The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother’s clinical need for frovatriptan and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed infant from frovatriptan or from the underlying maternal condition.








8.4 Pediatric Use

The safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been established. Therefore, frovatriptan is not recommended for use in patients under 18 years of age. There are no additional adverse reactions identified in pediatric patients based on postmarketing experience that were not previously identified in adults.








8.5 Geriatric Use

Mean blood concentrations of frovatriptan in elderly patients were 1.5 to 2 times higher than those seen in younger adults [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].   No dosage adjustment is necessary.








8.6 Patients with Hepatic Impairment

No dosage adjustment is necessary when frovatriptan is given to patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment.
There is no clinical or pharmacokinetic experience with frovatriptan in patients with severe hepatic impairment. Because a greater than two-fold increase in AUC is predicted in patients with severe hepatic impairment, there is a greater potential for adverse events in these patients, and frovatriptan should therefore be used with caution in that population.
10 OVERDOSAGE

The elimination half-life of frovatriptan is 26 hours [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Therefore, monitoring of patients after overdose with frovatriptan should continue for at least 48 hours or while symptoms or signs persist. There is no specific antidote to frovatriptan.  It is unknown what effect hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis has on the serum concentrations of frovatriptan.