6
		     
	ADVERSE REACTIONS


The following serious adverse reactions are described elsewhere in the labeling:

Hypersensitivity [see Contraindications (

4

) and Warnings and Precautions (

5.1

)]

Growth of Resistant Organisms With Prolonged Use [see Warnings and Precautions (

5.2

)]

Corneal Endothelial Cell Injury [see Warnings and Precautions (

5.3

)]






Most common adverse reactions occurring in ≥ 1% of patients included worsening of conjunctivitis, eye irritation, dysgeusia, and eye pain. (6)



To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Allergan at 1-800-433-8871 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.









6.1  
		     
	Clinical Studies Experience


Because clinical studies are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical studies of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical studies of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.
In clinical studies of patients with bacterial conjunctivitis treated with gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% (N=717), the most frequently reported adverse reactions occurring in ≥ 1% of patients were: worsening of the conjunctivitis, eye irritation, dysgeusia, and eye pain.
Additional adverse reactions reported with other formulations of gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution in other clinical studies included chemosis, conjunctival hemorrhage, dry eye, eye discharge, eyelid edema, headache, increased lacrimation, keratitis, red eye, papillary conjunctivitis, and reduced visual acuity.









6.2   Postmarketing Experience


The following adverse reactions have been identified during post-approval use of gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% or with other formulations of gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution. Because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure.  These reactions included anaphylactic reactions and angioedema (including pharyngeal, oral or facial edema), blepharitis, dyspnea, eye pruritus, eye swelling (including corneal and conjunctival edema), hypersensitivity, including signs and symptoms of eye allergy and allergic dermatitis, nausea, pruritus (including pruritus generalized, rash, urticaria), and vision blurred.
5
		     
	WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS






Hypersensitivity (5.1)

Growth of Resistant Organisms with Prolonged Use (5.2)

Corneal Endothelial Cell Injury (5.3)









5.1
		     
	Hypersensitivity



Some patients receiving topical ophthalmic gatifloxacin experienced hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylactic reactions, angioedema (including pharyngeal, laryngeal, or facial edema), dyspnea, urticaria, and itching, even following a single dose.  Rare cases of Stevens-Johnson Syndrome were reported in association with topical ophthalmic gatifloxacin use.  If an allergic reaction to gatifloxacin occurs, discontinue the drug [see Patient Counseling Information (

17

)].











5.
2
		     
	Growth of Resistant
 Organisms with Prolonged Use


Prolonged use of gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% may result in overgrowth of nonsusceptible organisms, including fungi. If superinfection occurs, discontinue use and institute alternative therapy.  Whenever clinical judgment dictates, examine the patient with the aid of magnification, such as slit lamp biomicroscopy and where appropriate, fluorescein staining. 









5.
3
		     
	Corneal Endothelial Cell Injury


Gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% is for topical ophthalmic use.  Gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% may cause corneal endothelial cell injury if introduced directly into the anterior chamber of the eye.
8

		     
	USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS







8.1 

		     
	Pregnancy



Risk Summary

There are no available data on the use of gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5%  in pregnant women to inform a drug-associated risk. Administration of oral gatifloxacin to pregnant rats and rabbits throughout organogenesis did not produce adverse development outcomes at clinically relevant doses.  Administration of gatifloxacin to rats during late gestation through lactation did not produce adverse maternal, fetal or neonatal effects at clinically relevant doses.

Data


Animal Data

Oral administration of gatifloxacin to pregnant rats throughout organogenesis produced teratogenic effects in rat fetuses, including skeletal/craniofacial malformations, delayed ossification, atrial enlargement, and reduced fetal weight, at doses greater than or equal to 150 mg/kg/day (approximately 600-fold higher than the maximum recommended human ophthalmic dose [MRHOD] for gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% of 0.04 mg/kg/day, on a mg/m2 basis).  No teratogenic effects were observed in rat or rabbit fetuses at doses of gatifloxacin up to 50 mg/kg/day (approximately 200- and 400-fold higher than the MRHOD, respectively, on a mg/m2 basis).  
In a perinatal/postnatal study in rats, oral administration of gatifloxacin during late gestation through lactation produced an increase in late gestation fetal loss and neonatal/perinatal mortality at 200 mg/kg/day (approximately 800-fold higher than the MRHOD on a mg/m2 basis).









8.2
		     
	Lactation



Risk Summary

There is no information regarding the presence of gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% in human milk, the effect of gatifloxacin on breastfed infants, or the effect of gatifloxacin on milk production.  Gatifloxacin was found in the breast milk of rats following oral administration of gatifloxacin during lactation.  However, systemic levels of gatifloxacin following topical ocular administration are low [see Clinical Pharmacology (

12.3

)], and it is not known whether gatifloxacin would be present in maternal milk at measurable levels following topical ocular administration.  The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother’s clinical need for gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5%  and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed child from gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5%.









8.4
		     
	Pediatric Use


The safety and effectiveness of gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% in infants below one year of age have not been established. Gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% has been demonstrated in clinical trials to be safe and effective for the treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis in pediatric patients one year or older [
see
 
C
linical
 S
tudies
 
(

14

)
].









8.5
		     
	Geriatric Use


No overall differences in safety or effectiveness have been observed between elderly and younger patients.