6 ADVERSE REACTIONS

The following adverse reactions are discussed in greater detail in other sections of the labeling:

Cardiovascular Thrombotic Events 
        
  
   [see Warnings and Precautions (
         
   
    5.1)]
        
  
   

GI Bleeding, Ulceration and Perforation 
        
  
   [see Warnings and Precautions (
         
   
    5.2)]
        
  
   

Hepatotoxicity 
        
  
   [see Warnings and Precautions (
         
   
    5.3)]
        
  
   

Hypertension 
        
  
   [see Warnings and Precautions (
         
   
    5.4)]
        
  
   

Heart Failure and Edema 
        
  
   [see Warnings and Precautions (
         
   
    5.5)]
        
  
   

Renal Toxicity and Hyperkalemia 
        
  
   [see Warnings and Precautions (
         
   
    5.6)]
        
  
   

Anaphylactic Reactions 
        
  
   [see Warnings and Precautions (
         
   
    5.7)]
        
  
   

Serious Skin Reactions 
        
  
   [see Warnings and Precautions (
         
   
    5.9)]
        
  
   

Hematologic Toxicity 
        
  
   [see Warnings and Precautions (
         
   
    5.12)]
        
  
   







Most common adverse reactions (incidence ≥ 3%) are headache, dizziness, dyspepsia and nausea. (
         
 
    6.1)
        

   

To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA at 1 (888) 721-7115 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.








6.1 Clinical Trials Experience

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in clinical practice.
In a gastroscopic study in 45 healthy subjects, the number of gastric mucosal abnormalities was significantly higher in the group receiving indomethacin capsules than in the group taking indomethacin suppositories or placebo.
In a double-blind comparative clinical study involving 175 patients with rheumatoid arthritis, however, the incidence of upper gastrointestinal adverse effects with indomethacin capsules or suppositories was comparable. The incidence of lower gastrointestinal adverse effects was greater in the suppository group.
The adverse reactions for indomethacin capsules listed in the following table have been arranged into two groups: (1) incidence greater than 1%; and (2) incidence less than 1%. The incidence for group (1) was obtained from 33 double-blind controlled clinical trials reported in the literature (1,092 patients). The incidence for group (2) was based on reports in clinical trials, in the literature, and on voluntary reports since marketing. The probability of a causal relationship exists between indomethacin capsules and these adverse reactions, some of which have been reported only rarely.
The adverse reactions reported with indomethacin capsules may occur with use of the suppositories. In addition, rectal irritation and tenesmus have been reported in patients who have received the capsules. 

Table 1 Summary of Adverse Reactions for Indomethacin Capsules







Incidence greater than 1%




Incidence less than 1%








GASTROINTESTINAL





nausea* with or without vomiting
             
     
      dyspepsia* (including indigestion, heartburn and epigastric pain)
             
     
      diarrhea
             
     
      abdominal distress or pain
             
     
      constipation
            
    
     


anorexia
             
     
      bloating (includes distension)
             
     
      flatulence
             
     
      peptic ulcer
             
     
      gastroenteritis
             
     
      rectal bleeding
             
     
      proctitis
             
     
      single or multiple ulcerations,
            
    
     
including perforation and hemorrhage of the esophagus, stomach, duodenum or small and large intestines
             
     
      intestinal ulceration associated with stenosis and obstruction
            
    
     


gastrointestinal bleeding without obvious ulcer formation and perforation of preexisting sigmoid lesions (diverticulum, carcinoma, etc.) development of ulcerative colitis and regional ileitis
             
     
      ulcerative stomatitis
             
     
      toxic hepatitis and jaundice (some fatal cases have been reported)
             
     
      intestinal strictures (diaphragms)
            
    
     
pancreatitis





CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM





headache (11.7%)
             
     
      dizziness*
             
     
      vertigo
             
     
      somnolence
             
     
      depression and fatigue (including malaise and listlessness)
            
    
     


anxiety (includes nervousness)
             
     
      muscle weakness
             
     
      involuntary muscle movements
             
     
      insomnia
             
     
      muzziness
             
     
      psychic disturbances including psychotic episodes
             
     
      mental confusion
             
     
      drowsiness
            
    
     


light-headedness
             
     
      syncope
             
     
      paresthesia
             
     
      aggravation of epilepsy and parkinsonism
             
     
      depersonalization
             
     
      coma
             
     
      peripheral neuropathy
             
     
      convulsion
             
     
      dysarthria
            
    
     





SPECIAL SENSES





tinnitus


ocular-corneal deposits and retinal disturbances, including those of the macula, have been reported in some patients on prolonged therapy with indomethacin


blurred vision
             
     
      diplopia
             
     
      hearing disturbances, deafness
            
    
     





CARDIOVASCULAR





None


hypertension
             
     
      hypotension
             
     
      tachycardia
             
     
      chest pain
            
    
     


congestive heart failure
             
     
      arrhythmia; palpitations
            
    
     





METABOLIC





None


edema
             
     
      weight gain
             
     
      fluid retention
             
     
      flushing or sweating
            
    
     


hyperglycemia
             
     
      glycosuria
             
     
      hyperkalemia
            
    
     





INTEGUMENTARY





none


pruritus
             
     
      rash; urticaria
             
     
      petechiae or ecchymosis
            
    
     


exfoliative dermatitis
             
     
      erythema nodosum
             
     
      loss of hair
             
     
      Stevens-Johnson syndrome
             
     
      erythema multiforme
             
     
      toxic epidermal necrolysis
            
    
     





HEMATOLOGIC





None


leukopenia
             
     
      bone marrow depression
             
     
      anemia secondary to obvious or occult gastrointestinal bleeding
            
    
     


aplastic anemia
             
     
      hemolytic anemia
             
     
      agranulocytosis
             
     
      thrombocytopenic purpura
             
     
      disseminated intravascular coagulation
            
    
     





HYPERSENSITIVITY





None


acute anaphylaxis
             
     
      acute respiratory distress
             
     
      rapid fall in blood pressure resembling a shock-like state
             
     
      angioedema
            
    
     


dyspnea
             
     
      asthma
             
     
      purpura
             
     
      angiitis
             
     
      pulmonary edema
             
     
      fever
            
    
     





GENITOURINARY





None


hematuria
             
     
      vaginal bleeding
             
     
      proteinuria
             
     
      nephrotic syndrome
             
     
      interstitial nephritis
            
    
     


BUN elevation
             
     
      renal insufficiency, including renal failure
            
    
     





MISCELLANEOUS





None


epistaxis
             
     
      breast changes, including enlargement and tenderness, or gynecomastia
            
    
     





* Reactions occurring in 3% to 9% of patients treated with indomethacin capsules. (Those reactions occurring in less than 3% of the patients are unmarked.)





Causal relationship unknown: Other reactions have been reported but occurred under circumstances where a causal relationship could not be established. However, in these rarely reported events, the possibility cannot be excluded. Therefore, these observations are being listed to serve as alerting information to physicians:
        

 

Cardiovascular: Thrombophlebitis
        

 

Hematologic: Although there have been several reports of leukemia, the supporting information is weak
        

 

Genitourinary: Urinary frequency
        

 
A rare occurrence of fulminant necrotizing fasciitis, particularly in association with Group Aβ hemolytic 
         
 
  streptococcus, has been described in persons treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, including indomethacin, sometimes with fatal outcome.
WARNING: RISK OF SERIOUS CARDIOVASCULAR AND GASTROINTESTINAL EVENTS





WARNING: RISK OF SERIOUS CARDIOVASCULAR AND GASTROINTESTINAL EVENTS


See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning.




Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) cause an increased risk of serious cardiovascular thrombotic events, including myocardial infarction and stroke, which can be fatal. This risk may occur early in treatment and may increase with duration of use (
           
   
      5.1)
          
  
     


Indomethacin capsules are contraindicated in the setting of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery (
           
   
      4, 
           
   
      5.1)
          
  
     


NSAIDs cause an increased risk of serious gastrointestinal (GI) adverse events including bleeding, ulceration, and perforation of the stomach or intestines, which can be fatal. These events can occur at any time during use and without warning symptoms. Elderly patients and patients with a prior history of peptic ulcer disease and/or GI bleeding are at greater risk for serious GI events (
           
   
      5.2)
          
  
     












Cardiovascular Thrombotic Events




Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) cause an increased risk of serious cardiovascular thrombotic events, including myocardial infarction and stroke, which can be fatal. This risk may occur early in treatment and may increase with duration of use [
           
   
    see 
            
    
     Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
].
          
  
   


Indomethacin capsules are contraindicated in the setting of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery [
           
   
    see 
            
    
     Contraindications (4) and 
            
    
     Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
]
           
   
    .














Gastrointestinal Bleeding, Ulceration, and Perforation




NSAIDs cause an increased risk of serious gastrointestinal (GI) adverse events including bleeding, ulceration, and perforation of the stomach or intestines, which can be fatal. These events can occur at any time during use and without warning symptoms. Elderly patients and patients with a prior history of peptic ulcer disease and/or GI bleeding are at greater risk for serious GI events [
           
   
    see 
            
    
     Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
].
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS






Hepatotoxicity: Inform patients of warning signs and symptoms of hepatotoxicity. Discontinue if abnormal liver tests persist or worsen or if clinical signs and symptoms of liver disease develop. (
          
  
     5.3)
         
 
    

Hypertension: Patients taking some antihypertensive medications may have impaired response to these therapies when taking NSAIDs. Monitor blood pressure. (
          
  
     5.4, 
          
  
     7)
         
 
    

Heart Failure and Edema: Avoid use of indomethacin capsules in patients with severe heart failure unless benefits are expected to outweigh risk of worsening heart failure. (
          
  
     5.5)
         
 
    

Renal Toxicity: Monitor renal function in patients with renal or hepatic impairment, heart failure, dehydration, or hypovolemia. Avoid use of indomethacin capsules in patients with advanced renal disease unless benefits are expected to outweigh risk of worsening renal function. (
          
  
     5.6)
         
 
    

Anaphylactic Reactions: Seek emergency help if an anaphylactic reaction occurs. (
          
  
     5.7)
         
 
    

Exacerbation of Asthma Related to Aspirin Sensitivity: Indomethacin capsules are contraindicated in patients with aspirin-sensitive asthma. Monitor patients with preexisting asthma (without aspirin sensitivity). (
          
  
     5.8)
         
 
    

Serious Skin Reactions: Discontinue indomethacin capsules at first appearance of skin rash or other signs of hypersensitivity. (
          
  
     5.9)
         
 
    

Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS): Discontinue and evaluate clinically (
          
  
     5.10)
         
 
    

Fetal Toxicity: Limit use of NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, between about 20 to 30 weeks in pregnancy due to the risk of oligohydramnios/fetal renal dysfunction. Avoid use of NSAIDs in women at about 30 weeks gestation and later in pregnancy due to the risks of oligohydramnios/fetal renal dysfunction and premature closure of the fetal ductus arteriosus (
          
  
     5.11, 
          
  
     8.1)
         
 
    

Hematologic Toxicity: Monitor hemoglobin or hematocrit in patients with any signs or symptoms of anemia. (
          
  
     5.12, 
          
  
     7)
         
 
    








5.1 Cardiovascular Thrombotic Events

Clinical trials of several COX-2 selective and nonselective NSAIDs of up to three years duration have shown an increased risk of serious cardiovascular (CV) thrombotic events, including myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke, which can be fatal. Based on available data, it is unclear that the risk for CV thrombotic events is similar for all NSAIDs. The relative increase in serious CV thrombotic events over baseline conferred by NSAID use appears to be similar in those with and without known CV disease or risk factors for CV disease. However, patients with known CV disease or risk factors had a higher absolute incidence of excess serious CV thrombotic events, due to their increased baseline rate. Some observational studies found that this increased risk of serious CV thrombotic events began as early as the first weeks of treatment. The increase in CV thrombotic risk has been observed most consistently at higher doses.
To minimize the potential risk for an adverse CV event in NSAID-treated patients, use the lowest effective dose for the shortest duration possible. Physicians and patients should remain alert for the development of such events, throughout the entire treatment course, even in the absence of previous CV symptoms. Patients should be informed about the symptoms of serious CV events and the steps to take if they occur.
There is no consistent evidence that concurrent use of aspirin mitigates the increased risk of serious CV thrombotic events associated with NSAID use. The concurrent use of aspirin and an NSAID, such as indomethacin, increases the risk of serious gastrointestinal (GI) events [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
].
        

 








Status Post Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgery

Two large, controlled clinical trials of a COX-2 selective NSAID for the treatment of pain in the first 10 to 14 days following CABG surgery found an increased incidence of myocardial infarction and stroke. NSAIDs are contraindicated in the setting of CABG [
           
 
  see 
            
  
   Contraindications (4)
].
          

 










Post-MI Patients

Observational studies conducted in the Danish National Registry have demonstrated that patients treated with NSAIDs in the post-MI period were at increased risk of reinfarction, CV-related death, and all-cause mortality beginning in the first week of treatment. In this same cohort, the incidence of death in the first year post-MI was 20 per 100 person years in NSAID-treated patients compared to 12 per 100 person years in non-NSAID exposed patients. Although the absolute rate of death declined somewhat after the first year post-MI, the increased relative risk of death in NSAID users persisted over at least the next four years of follow-up.
Avoid the use of indomethacin capsules in patients with a recent MI unless the benefits are expected to outweigh the risk of recurrent CV thrombotic events. If indomethacin capsules are used in patients with a recent MI, monitor patients for signs of cardiac ischemia.










5.2 Gastrointestinal Bleeding, Ulceration, and Perforation

NSAIDs, including indomethacin, cause serious gastrointestinal (GI) adverse events including inflammation, bleeding, ulceration, and perforation of the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, or large intestine, which can be fatal. These serious adverse events can occur at any time, with or without warning symptoms, in patients treated with NSAIDs. Only one in five patients who develop a serious upper GI adverse event on NSAID therapy is symptomatic. Upper GI ulcers, gross bleeding, or perforation caused by NSAIDs occurred in approximately 1% of patients treated for 3 to 6 months, and in about 2% to 4% of patients treated for one year. However, even short-term NSAID therapy is not without risk.








Risk Factors for GI Bleeding, Ulceration, and Perforation

Patients with a prior history of peptic ulcer disease and/or GI bleeding who used NSAIDs had a greater than 10-fold increased risk for developing a GI bleed compared to patients without these risk factors. Other factors that increase the risk of GI bleeding in patients treated with NSAIDs include longer duration of NSAID therapy; concomitant use of oral corticosteroids, aspirin, anticoagulants, or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs); smoking; use of alcohol; older age; and poor general health status. Most postmarketing reports of fatal GI events occurred in elderly or debilitated patients. Additionally, patients with advanced liver disease and/or coagulopathy are at increased risk for GI bleeding.










Strategies to Minimize the GI Risks in NSAID-treated patients:


Use the lowest effective dosage for the shortest possible duration.
           
Avoid administration of more than one NSAID at a time.
           
Avoid use in patients at higher risk unless benefits are expected to outweigh the increased risk of bleeding. For such patients, as well as those with active GI bleeding, consider alternate therapies other than NSAIDs.
           
Remain alert for signs and symptoms of GI ulceration and bleeding during NSAID therapy.
           
If a serious GI adverse event is suspected, promptly initiate evaluation and treatment, and discontinue indomethacin capsules until a serious GI adverse event is ruled out.
           
In the setting of concomitant use of low-dose aspirin for cardiac prophylaxis, monitor patients more closely for evidence of GI bleeding [
            
  
   see Drug Interactions (
             
   
    7)
            
  
   ].
           
 
  











5.3 Hepatotoxicity

Elevations of ALT or AST (three or more times the upper limit of normal [ULN]) have been reported in approximately 1% of NSAID-treated patients in clinical trials. In addition, rare, sometimes fatal, cases of severe hepatic injury, including fulminant hepatitis, liver necrosis, and hepatic failure have been reported.
Elevations of ALT or AST (less than three times ULN) may occur in up to 15% of patients treated with NSAIDs including indomethacin.
Inform patients of the warning signs and symptoms of hepatotoxicity (e.g., nausea, fatigue, lethargy, diarrhea, pruritus, jaundice, right upper quadrant tenderness, and “flu-like” symptoms). If clinical signs and symptoms consistent with liver disease develop, or if systemic manifestations occur (e.g., eosinophilia, rash, etc.), discontinue indomethacin capsules immediately, and perform a clinical evaluation of the patient.








5.4 Hypertension

NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, can lead to new onset of hypertension or worsening of preexisting hypertension, either of which may contribute to the increased incidence of CV events. Patients taking angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, thiazide diuretics, or loop diuretics may have impaired response to these therapies when taking NSAIDs [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Drug Interactions (7)
].
        

 
Monitor blood pressure (BP) during the initiation of NSAID treatment and throughout the course of therapy.








5.5 Heart Failure and Edema

The Coxib and traditional NSAID Trialists’ Collaboration meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials demonstrated an approximately two-fold increase in hospitalizations for heart failure in COX-2 selective-treated patients and nonselective NSAID-treated patients compared to placebo-treated patients. In a Danish National Registry study of patients with heart failure, NSAID use increased the risk of MI, hospitalization for heart failure, and death.
Additionally, fluid retention and edema have been observed in some patients treated with NSAIDs. Use of indomethacin may blunt the CV effects of several therapeutic agents used to treat these medical conditions (e.g., diuretics, ACE inhibitors, or angiotensin receptor blockers [ARBs]) [
         
 
  see
          
  
    Drug Interactions (7)
].
        

 
Avoid the use of indomethacin capsules in patients with severe heart failure unless the benefits are expected to outweigh the risk of worsening heart failure. If indomethacin capsules are used in patients with severe heart failure, monitor patients for signs of worsening heart failure.








5.6 Renal Toxicity and Hyperkalemia







Renal Toxicity

Long-term administration of NSAIDs has resulted in renal papillary necrosis and other renal injury.
Renal toxicity has also been seen in patients in whom renal prostaglandins have a compensatory role in the maintenance of renal perfusion. In these patients, administration of an NSAID may cause a dose-dependent reduction in prostaglandin formation and, secondarily, in renal blood flow, which may precipitate overt renal decompensation. Patients at greatest risk of this reaction are those with impaired renal function, dehydration, hypovolemia, heart failure, liver dysfunction, those taking diuretics and ACE inhibitors or ARBs, and the elderly. Discontinuation of NSAID therapy is usually followed by recovery to the pretreatment state.
No information is available from controlled clinical studies regarding the use of indomethacin capsules in patients with advanced renal disease. The renal effects of indomethacin capsules may hasten the progression of renal dysfunction in patients with preexisting renal disease. 
Correct volume status in dehydrated or hypovolemic patients prior to initiating indomethacin capsules. Monitor renal function in patients with renal or hepatic impairment, heart failure, dehydration, or hypovolemia during use of indomethacin capsules [
           
 
  see 
            
  
   Drug Interactions (7)
]
           
 
  . Avoid the use of indomethacin capsules in patients with advanced renal disease unless the benefits are expected to outweigh the risk of worsening renal function. If indomethacin capsules are used in patients with advanced renal disease, monitor patients for signs of worsening renal function.
          

 
It has been reported that the addition of the potassium-sparing diuretic, triamterene, to a maintenance schedule of indomethacin resulted in reversible acute renal failure in two of four healthy volunteers. Indomethacin and triamterene should not be administered together.










Hyperkalemia

Increases in serum potassium concentration, including hyperkalemia, have been reported with use of NSAIDs, even in some patients without renal impairment. In patients with normal renal function, these effects have been attributed to a hyporeninemic-hypoaldosteronism state.
Both Indomethacin and potassium-sparing diuretics may be associated with increased serum potassium levels. The potential effects of indomethacin and potassium-sparing diuretics on potassium levels and renal function should be considered when these agents are administered concurrently.










5.7 Anaphylactic Reactions

Indomethacin has been associated with anaphylactic reactions in patients with and without known hypersensitivity to indomethacin and in patients with aspirin-sensitive asthma [see 
         
 
  
Contraindications (4) and 
          
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.8)
]. 
        

 
Seek emergency help if an anaphylactic reaction occurs.








5.8 Exacerbation of Asthma Related to Aspirin Sensitivity

A subpopulation of patients with asthma may have aspirin-sensitive asthma which may include chronic rhinosinusitis complicated by nasal polyps; severe, potentially fatal bronchospasm; and/or intolerance to aspirin and other NSAIDs. Because cross-reactivity between aspirin and other NSAIDs has been reported in such aspirin-sensitive patients, indomethacin capsules are contraindicated in patients with this form of aspirin sensitivity [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Contraindications (4)
]. When indomethacin capsules are used in patients with preexisting asthma (without known aspirin sensitivity), monitor patients for changes in the signs and symptoms of asthma.
        

 








5.9 Serious Skin Reactions

NSAIDs, including indomethacin, can cause serious skin adverse reactions such as exfoliative dermatitis, Stevens‑Johnson syndrome (SJS), and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), which can be fatal. These serious events may occur without warning. Inform patients about the signs and symptoms of serious skin reactions, and to discontinue the use of indomethacin capsules at the first appearance of skin rash or any other sign of hypersensitivity. 
Indomethacin capsules are contraindicated in patients with previous serious skin reactions to NSAIDs [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Contraindications (4)
].
        

 








5.10 Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS)  

Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS) has been reported in patients taking NSAIDs such as indomethacin. Some of these events have been fatal or life-threatening. DRESS typically, although not exclusively, presents with fever, rash, lymphadenopathy, and/or facial swelling. Other clinical manifestations may include hepatitis, nephritis, hematological abnormalities, myocarditis, or myositis. Sometimes symptoms of DRESS may resemble an acute viral infection. Eosinophilia is often present. Because this disorder is variable in its presentation, other organ systems not noted here may be involved. It is important to note that early manifestations of hypersensitivity, such as fever or lymphadenopathy, may be present even though rash is not evident. If such signs or symptoms are present, discontinue indomethacin capsules and evaluate the patient immediately.








5.11 Fetal Toxicity


Premature Closure of Fetal Ductus Arteriosus:

Avoid use of NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, in pregnant women at about 30 weeks gestation and later. NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, increase the risk of premature closure of the fetal ductus arteriosus at approximately this gestational age.

Oligohydramnios/Neonatal Renal Impairment:

Use of NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, at about 20 weeks gestation or later in pregnancy may cause fetal renal dysfunction leading to oligohydramnios and, in some cases, neonatal renal impairment. These adverse outcomes are seen, on average, after days to weeks of treatment, although oligohydramnios has been infrequently reported as soon as 48 hours after NSAID initiation. 
Oligohydramnios is often, but not always, reversible with treatment discontinuation. Complications of prolonged oligohydramnios may, for example, include limb contractures and delayed lung maturation. In some postmarketing cases of impaired neonatal renal function, invasive procedures such as exchange transfusion or dialysis were required.
If NSAID treatment is necessary between about 20 weeks and 30 weeks gestation, limit indomethacin capsules use to the lowest effective dose and shortest duration possible. Consider ultrasound monitoring of amniotic fluid if indomethacin capsules treatment extends beyond 48 hours. Discontinue indomethacin capsules if oligohydramnios occurs and follow up according to clinical practice [
         
 
  see Use in Specific Populations (
          
  
   8.1)
         
 
  ].
        

 








5.12 Hematologic Toxicity

Anemia has occurred in NSAID-treated patients. This may be due to occult or gross blood loss, fluid retention, or an incompletely described effect on erythropoiesis. If a patient treated with indomethacin capsules has any signs or symptoms of anemia, monitor hemoglobin or hematocrit.
NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, may increase the risk of bleeding events. Co-morbid conditions, such as coagulation disorders, or concomitant use of warfarin, other anticoagulants, antiplatelet agents (e.g., aspirin), serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) may increase this risk. Monitor these patients for signs of bleeding [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Drug Interactions (7)
].
        

 








5.13 Masking of Inflammation and Fever

The pharmacological activity of indomethacin capsules in reducing inflammation, and possibly fever, may diminish the utility of diagnostic signs in detecting infections. 








5.14 Laboratory Monitoring

Because serious GI bleeding, hepatotoxicity, and renal injury can occur without warning symptoms or signs, consider monitoring patients on long-term NSAID treatment with a CBC and a chemistry profile periodically [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.2, 
          
  
   5.3, 
          
  
   5.6)
].
        

 








5.15 Central Nervous System Effects

Indomethacin capsules may aggravate depression or other psychiatric disturbances, epilepsy, and parkinsonism, and should be used with considerable caution in patients with these conditions. Discontinue indomethacin capsules if severe CNS adverse reactions develop.
Indomethacin capsules may cause drowsiness; therefore, caution patients about engaging in activities requiring mental alertness and motor coordination, such as driving a car. Indomethacin may also cause headache. Headache which persists despite dosage reduction requires cessation of therapy with indomethacin capsules.








5.16 Ocular Effects

Corneal deposits and retinal disturbances, including those of the macula, have been observed in some patients who had received prolonged therapy with indomethacin capsules. Be alert to the possible association between the changes noted and indomethacin capsules. It is advisable to discontinue therapy if such changes are observed. Blurred vision may be a significant symptom and warrants a thorough ophthalmological examination. Since these changes may be asymptomatic, ophthalmologic examination at periodic intervals is desirable in patients receiving prolonged therapy. Indomethacin capsules are not indicated for long-term treatment.
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS





Infertility: NSAIDs are associated with reversible infertility. Consider withdrawal of indomethacin capsules in women who have difficulties conceiving. (
         
 
    8.3)
        

   







8.1 Pregnancy







Risk Summary

Use of NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, can cause premature closure of the fetal ductus arteriosus and fetal renal dysfunction leading to oligohydramnios and, in some cases, neonatal renal impairment. Because of these risks, limit dose and duration of indomethacin capsules use between about 20 and 30 weeks of gestation, and avoid indomethacin capsules use at about 30 weeks of gestation and later in pregnancy (
           
 
  see Clinical Considerations, Data).
          

 

Premature Closure of Fetal Ductus Arteriosus

Use of NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, at about 30 weeks gestation or later in pregnancy increases the risk of premature closure of the fetal ductus arteriosus.

Oligohydramnios/Neonatal Renal Impairment

Use of NSAIDs at about 20 weeks gestation or later in pregnancy has been associated with cases of fetal renal dysfunction leading to oligohydramnios, and in some cases, neonatal renal impairment.
Data from observational studies regarding other potential embryofetal risks of NSAID use in women in the first or second trimesters of pregnancy are inconclusive. In animal reproduction studies retarded fetal ossification was observed with administration of indomethacin to mice and rats during organogenesis at doses 0.1 and 0.2 times, respectively, the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD, 200 mg). In published studies in pregnant mice, indomethacin produced maternal toxicity and death, increased fetal resorptions, and fetal malformations at 0.1 times the MRHD. When rat and mice dams were dosed during the last three days of gestation, indomethacin produced neuronal necrosis in the offspring at 0.1 and 0.05 times the MRHD, respectively [see 
           
 
  Data]. Based on animal data, prostaglandins have been shown to have an important role in endometrial vascular permeability, blastocyst implantation, and decidualization. In animal studies, administration of prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors such as indomethacin, resulted in increased pre- and post-implantation loss. Prostaglandins also have been shown to have an important role in fetal kidney development. In published animal studies, prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors have been reported to impair kidney development when administered at clinically relevant doses.
          

 
The estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population(s) is unknown. All pregnancies have a background risk of birth defect, loss, or other adverse outcomes. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2 to 4% and 15 to 20%, respectively.

Clinical Considerations


Fetal/Neonatal Adverse Reactions

Premature Closure of Fetal Ductus Arteriosus:
Avoid use of NSAIDs in women at about 30 weeks gestation and later in pregnancy, because NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, can cause premature closure of the fetal ductus arteriosus (
           
 
  see Data).
          

 

Oligohydramnios/Neonatal Renal Impairment

If an NSAID is necessary at about 20 weeks gestation or later in pregnancy, limit the use to the lowest effective dose and shortest duration possible. If indomethacin capsules treatment extends beyond 48 hours, consider monitoring with ultrasound for oligohydramnios. If oligohydramnios occurs, discontinue indomethacin capsules and follow up according to clinical practice (
           
 
  see Data).
          

 

Labor or Delivery

There are no studies on the effects of indomethacin capsules during labor or delivery. In animal studies, NSAIDs, including indomethacin, inhibit prostaglandin synthesis, cause delayed parturition, and increase the incidence of stillbirth.

Data


Human Data

Premature Closure of Fetal Ductus Arteriosus:
Published literature reports that the use of NSAIDs at about 30 weeks of gestation and later in pregnancy may cause premature closure of the fetal ductus arteriosus.
Oligohydramnios/Neonatal Renal Impairment:
Published studies and postmarketing reports describe maternal NSAID use at about 20 weeks gestation or later in pregnancy associated with fetal renal dysfunction leading to oligohydramnios, and in some cases, neonatal renal impairment. These adverse outcomes are seen, on average, after days to weeks of treatment, although oligohydramnios has been infrequently reported as soon as 48 hours after NSAID initiation. In many cases, but not all, the decrease in amniotic fluid was transient and reversible with cessation of the drug. There have been a limited number of case reports of maternal NSAID use and neonatal renal dysfunction without oligohydramnios, some of which were irreversible. Some cases of neonatal renal dysfunction required treatment with invasive procedures, such as exchange transfusion or dialysis.
Methodological limitations of these postmarketing studies and reports include lack of a control group; limited information regarding dose, duration, and timing of drug exposure; and concomitant use of other medications. These limitations preclude establishing a reliable estimate of the risk of adverse fetal and neonatal outcomes with maternal NSAID use. Because the published safety data on neonatal outcomes involved mostly preterm infants, the generalizability of certain reported risks to the full-term infant exposed to NSAIDs through maternal use is uncertain.

Animal data

Reproductive studies were conducted in mice and rats at dosages of 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 mg/kg/day. Except for retarded fetal ossification at 4 mg/kg/day (0.1 times [mice] and 0.2 times [rats] the MRHD on a mg/m
           
 
  2 basis, respectively) considered secondary to the decreased average fetal weights, no increase in fetal malformations was observed as compared with control groups. Other studies in mice reported in the literature using higher doses (5 to 15 mg/kg/day, 0.1 to 0.4 times MRHD on a mg/m
           
 
  2 basis) have described maternal toxicity and death, increased fetal resorptions, and fetal malformations.
          

 
In rats and mice, maternal indomethacin administration of 4 mg/kg/day (0.2 times and 0.1 times the MRHD on a mg/m
           
 
  2 basis) during the last 3 days of gestation was associated with an increased incidence of neuronal necrosis in the diencephalon in the live-born fetuses however no increase in neuronal necrosis was observed at 2 mg/kg/day as compared to the control groups (0.1 times and 0.05 times the MRHD on a mg/m
           
 
  2 basis). Administration of 0.5 or 4 mg/kg/day to offspring during the first 3 days of life did not cause an increase in neuronal necrosis at either dose level.
          

 










8.2 Lactation







Risk Summary

Based on available published clinical data, indomethacin may be present in human milk. The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother’s clinical need for indomethacin capsules and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed infant from the indomethacin capsules or from the underlying maternal condition.










Data

In one study, levels of indomethacin in breast milk were below the sensitivity of the assay (<20 mcg/L) in 11 of 15 women using doses ranging from 75 mg orally to 300 mg rectally daily (0.94 to 4.29 mg/kg daily) in the postpartum period. Based on these levels, the average concentration present in breast milk was estimated to be 0.27% of the maternal weight-adjusted dose. In another study indomethacin levels were measured in breast milk of eight postpartum women using doses of 75 mg daily and the results were used to calculate an estimated infant daily dose. The estimated infant dose of indomethacin from breast milk was less than 30 mcg/day or 4.5 mcg/kg/day assuming breast milk intake of 150 mL/kg/day. This is 0.5% of the maternal weight-adjusted dosage or about 3% of the neonatal dose for treatment of patent ductus arteriosus.










8.3 Females and Males of Reproductive Potential







Infertility









Females

Based on the mechanism of action, the use of prostaglandin-mediated NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, may delay or prevent rupture of ovarian follicles, which has been associated with reversible infertility in some women. Published animal studies have shown that administration of prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors has the potential to disrupt prostaglandin-mediated follicular rupture required for ovulation. Small studies in women treated with NSAIDs have also shown a reversible delay in ovulation. Consider withdrawal of NSAIDs, including indomethacin capsules, in women who have difficulties conceiving or who are undergoing investigation of infertility. 












8.4 Pediatric Use

Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients 14 years of age and younger has not been established.
Indomethacin capsules should not be prescribed for pediatric patients 14 years of age and younger unless toxicity or lack of efficacy associated with other drugs warrants the risk.
In experience with more than 900 pediatric patients reported in the literature or to the manufacturer who were treated with indomethacin capsules, side effects in pediatric patients were comparable to those reported in adults. Experience in pediatric patients has been confined to the use of indomethacin capsules.
If a decision is made to use indomethacin for pediatric patients two years of age or older, such patients should be monitored closely and periodic assessment of liver function is recommended. There have been cases of hepatotoxicity reported in pediatric patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, including fatalities. If indomethacin treatment is instituted, a suggested starting dose is 1 to 2 mg/kg/day given in divided doses. Maximum daily dosage should not exceed 3 mg/kg/day or 150 to 200 mg/day, whichever is less. Limited data are available to support the use of a maximum daily dosage of 4 mg/kg/day or 150 to 200 mg/day, whichever is less. As symptoms subside, the total daily dosage should be reduced to the lowest level required to control symptoms, or the drug should be discontinued.








8.5 Geriatric Use

Elderly patients, compared to younger patients, are at greater risk for NSAID-associated serious cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and/or renal adverse reactions. If the anticipated benefit for the elderly patient outweighs these potential risks, start dosing at the low end of the dosing range, and monitor patients for adverse effects [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 
          
  
   5.2, 
          
  
   5.3, 
          
  
   5.6, 
          
  
   5.14)
].
        

 
Indomethacin may cause confusion or rarely, psychosis [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Adverse Reactions (6.1)];
         
 
   physicians should remain alert to the possibility of such adverse effects in the elderly.
        

 
Indomethacin and its metabolites are known to be substantially excreted by the kidneys, and the risk of adverse reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, use caution in this patient population, and it may be useful to monitor renal function [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
].
10 OVERDOSAGE

Symptoms following acute NSAID overdosages have been typically limited to lethargy, drowsiness, nausea, vomiting, and epigastric pain, which have been generally reversible with supportive care. Gastrointestinal bleeding has occurred. Hypertension, acute renal failure, respiratory depression, and coma have occurred, but were rare [
       
 
  see 
        
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 
        
  
   5.2, 
        
  
   5.4, 
        
  
   5.6)
].
      

 
Manage patients with symptomatic and supportive care following an NSAID overdosage. There are no specific antidotes. Consider emesis and/or activated charcoal (60 to 100 grams in adults, 1 to 2 grams per kg of body weight in pediatric patients) and/or osmotic cathartic in symptomatic patients seen within four hours of ingestion or in patients with a large overdosage (5 to 10 times the recommended dosage). Forced diuresis, alkalinization of urine, hemodialysis, or hemoperfusion may not be useful due to high protein binding.
For additional information about overdosage treatment contact a poison control center (1-800-222-1222).