6 ADVERSE REACTIONS




Most common adverse reactions (>10%) – infections (e.g. upper respiratory, sinusitis, and pharyngitis), infusion-related reactions, headache, and abdominal pain. (6.1)


To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Organon LLC, a subsidiary of Organon & Co., at 1-844-674-3200 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.








6.1	Clinical Trials Experience

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.








Adverse Reactions in Adults

The data described herein reflect exposure to infliximab in 4779 adult patients (1304 patients with RA, 1106 patients with CD, 202 with AS, 293 with PsA, 484 with UC, 1373 with Ps, and 17 patients with other conditions), including 2625 patients exposed beyond 30 weeks and 374 exposed beyond 1 year. [For information on adverse reactions in pediatric patients see Adverse Reactions (6.1)]. One of the most-common reasons for discontinuation of treatment was infusion-related reactions (e.g., dyspnea, flushing, headache and rash).










Infusion-Related Reactions









Adverse Reactions During or Shortly After Infusion

An infusion reaction was defined in clinical trials as any adverse event occurring during an infusion or within 1 hour after an infusion. In all the clinical studies, approximately 20% of infliximab-treated patients experienced an infusion reaction compared with 10% of placebo-treated patients. Of infliximab-treated patients who had an infusion reaction during the induction period, 27% experienced an infusion reaction during the maintenance period. Of patients who did not have an infusion reaction during the induction period, 9% experienced an infusion reaction during the maintenance period.
Among all infliximab infusions, 3% were accompanied by nonspecific symptoms such as fever or chills, 1% were accompanied by cardiopulmonary reactions (primarily chest pain, hypotension, hypertension or dyspnea), and <1% were accompanied by pruritus, urticaria, or the combined symptoms of pruritus/urticaria and cardiopulmonary reactions. Serious infusion reactions occurred in <1% of patients and included anaphylaxis, convulsions, erythematous rash and hypotension. Approximately 3% of patients discontinued infliximab because of infusion reactions, and all patients recovered with treatment and/or discontinuation of the infusion. Infliximab infusions beyond the initial infusion were not associated with a higher incidence of reactions. The infusion reaction rates remained stable in Ps through 1 year in Ps Study I. In psoriasis Study II, the rates were variable over time and somewhat higher following the final infusion than after the initial infusion. Across the 3 Ps studies, the percent of total infusions resulting in infusion reactions (i.e., an adverse event occurring within 1 hour) was 7% in the 3 mg/kg group, 4% in the 5 mg/kg group, and 1% in the placebo group.
Patients who became positive for antibodies to infliximab were more likely (approximately two- to three-fold) to have an infusion reaction than were those who were negative. Use of concomitant immunosuppressant agents appeared to reduce the frequency of both antibodies to infliximab and infusion reactions [see Adverse Reactions (6.1) and Drug Interactions (7.3)].










Infusion Reactions Following Re-administration

In a clinical trial of patients with moderate to severe Ps designed to assess the efficacy of long-term maintenance therapy versus re-treatment with an induction regimen of infliximab following disease flare, 4% (8/219) of patients in the re-treatment induction therapy arm experienced serious infusion reactions versus < 1% (1/222) in the maintenance therapy arm. Patients enrolled in this trial did not receive any concomitant immunosuppressant therapy. In this study, the majority of serious infusion reactions occurred during the second infusion at Week 2. Symptoms included, but were not limited to, dyspnea, urticaria, facial edema, and hypotension. In all cases, infliximab treatment was discontinued and/or other treatment instituted with complete resolution of signs and symptoms.










Delayed Reactions/Reactions Following Re-administration

In Ps studies, approximately 1% of infliximab-treated patients experienced a possible delayed hypersensitivity reaction, generally reported as serum sickness or a combination of arthralgia and/or myalgia with fever and/or rash. These reactions generally occurred within 2 weeks after repeat infusion.












Infections

In infliximab clinical studies, treated infections were reported in 36% of infliximab-treated patients (average of 51 weeks of follow-up) and in 25% of placebo-treated patients (average of 37 weeks of follow-up). The infections most frequently reported were respiratory tract infections (including sinusitis, pharyngitis, and bronchitis) and urinary tract infections. Among infliximab-treated patients, serious infections included pneumonia, cellulitis, abscess, skin ulceration, sepsis, and bacterial infection. In clinical trials, 7 opportunistic infections were reported; 2 cases each of coccidioidomycosis (1 case was fatal) and histoplasmosis (1 case was fatal), and 1 case each of pneumocystosis, nocardiosis and cytomegalovirus. Tuberculosis (TB) was reported in 14 patients, 4 of whom died due to miliary tuberculosis. Other cases of TB, including disseminated TB, also have been reported post-marketing. Most of these cases of TB occurred within the first 2 months after initiation of therapy with infliximab and may reflect recrudescence of latent disease [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]. In the 1-year placebo-controlled studies RA I and RA II, 5.3% of patients receiving infliximab every 8 weeks with MTX developed serious infections as compared to 3.4% of placebo patients receiving MTX. Of 924 patients receiving infliximab, 1.7% developed pneumonia and 0.4% developed TB, when compared to 0.3% and 0.0% in the placebo arm respectively. In a shorter (22-week) placebo-controlled study of 1082 RA patients randomized to receive placebo, 3 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg infliximab infusions at 0, 2, and 6 weeks, followed by every 8 weeks with MTX, serious infections were more frequent in the 10 mg/kg infliximab group (5.3%) than the 3 mg/kg or placebo groups (1.7% in both). During the 54-week Crohn's II Study, 15% of patients with fistulizing CD developed a new fistula-related abscess.
In infliximab clinical studies in patients with UC, infections treated with antimicrobials were reported in 27% of infliximab-treated patients (average of 41 weeks of follow-up) and in 18% of placebo-treated patients (average 32 weeks of follow-up). The types of infections, including serious infections, reported in patients with UC were similar to those reported in other clinical studies.
The onset of serious infections may be preceded by constitutional symptoms such as fever, chills, weight loss, and fatigue. The majority of serious infections, however, may also be preceded by signs or symptoms localized to the site of the infection.










Autoantibodies/Lupus-like Syndrome

Approximately half of infliximab-treated patients in clinical trials who were antinuclear antibody (ANA) negative at baseline developed a positive ANA during the trial compared with approximately one-fifth of placebo-treated patients. Anti-dsDNA antibodies were newly detected in approximately one-fifth of infliximab-treated patients compared with 0% of placebo-treated patients. Reports of lupus and lupus-like syndromes, however, remain uncommon.










Malignancies

In controlled trials, more infliximab-treated patients developed malignancies than placebo-treated patients [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
In a randomized controlled clinical trial exploring the use of infliximab in patients with moderate to severe COPD who were either current smokers or ex-smokers, 157 patients were treated with infliximab at doses similar to those used in RA and CD. Of these infliximab-treated patients, 9 developed a malignancy, including 1 lymphoma, for a rate of 7.67 cases per 100 patient-years of follow-up (median duration of follow-up 0.8 years; 95% CI 3.51-14.56). There was 1 reported malignancy among 77 control patients for a rate of 1.63 cases per 100 patient-years of follow-up (median duration of follow-up 0.8 years; 95% CI 0.04-9.10). The majority of the malignancies developed in the lung or head and neck [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].










Adverse Reactions in Patients with NYHA Class III/IV Heart Failure

In a randomized, double-blind study evaluating infliximab in moderate or severe heart failure (NYHA Class III/IV; left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 35%), 150 patients were randomized to receive treatment with 3 infusions of infliximab 10 mg/kg, 5 mg/kg, or placebo, at 0, 2, and 6 weeks. Higher incidences of mortality and hospitalization due to worsening heart failure were observed in patients receiving the 10 mg/kg infliximab dose. At 1 year, 8 patients in the 10 mg/kg infliximab group had died compared with 4 deaths each in the 5 mg/kg infliximab and the placebo groups. There were trends toward increased dyspnea, hypotension, angina, and dizziness in both the 10 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg infliximab treatment groups, versus placebo. Infliximab products have not been studied in patients with mild heart failure (NYHA Class I/II) [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.5)].











Hepatotoxicity

Severe liver injury, including acute liver failure and autoimmune hepatitis, has been reported in patients receiving infliximab products [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]. Reactivation of hepatitis B virus has occurred in patients receiving TNF blockers, including infliximab products, who are chronic carriers of this virus [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].
In clinical trials in RA, CD, UC, AS, Ps, and PsA, elevations of aminotransferases were observed (ALT more common than AST) in a greater proportion of patients receiving infliximab than in controls (Table 1), both when infliximab was given as monotherapy and when it was used in combination with other immunosuppressive agents. In general, patients who developed ALT and AST elevations were asymptomatic, and the abnormalities decreased or resolved with either continuation or discontinuation of infliximab, or modification of concomitant medications.

Table 1 Proportion of Patients with Elevated ALT in Clinical Trials in Adults











Proportion of patients with elevated ALT





> 1 to < 3 × ULN


≥ 3 × ULN


≥ 5 × ULN




Placebo
Infliximab
Placebo
Infliximab
Placebo
Infliximab




Rheumatoid arthritisPlacebo patients received methotrexate while infliximab patients received both infliximab and methotrexate. Median follow-up was 58 weeks.

24%
34%
3%
4%
< 1%
< 1%


Crohn's diseasePlacebo patients in the 2 Phase 3 trials in CD received an initial dose of 5 mg/kg infliximab at study start and were on placebo in the maintenance phase. Patients who were randomized to the placebo maintenance group and then later crossed over to infliximab are included in the infliximab group in ALT analysis. Median follow-up was 54 weeks.

34%
39%
4%
5%
0%
2%


Ulcerative colitisMedian follow-up was 30 weeks. Specifically, the median duration of follow-up was 30 weeks for placebo and 31 weeks for infliximab.

12%
17%
1%
2%
< 1%
< 1%


Ankylosing spondylitisMedian follow-up was 24 weeks for the placebo group and 102 weeks for the infliximab group.

15%
51%
0%
10%
0%
4%


Psoriatic arthritisMedian follow-up was 39 weeks for the infliximab group and 18 weeks for the placebo group.

16%
50%
0%
7%
0%
2%


Plaque psoriasisALT values are obtained in 2 Phase 3 Ps studies with median follow-up of 50 weeks for infliximab and 16 weeks for placebo.

24%
49%
<1%
8%
0%
3%











Adverse Reactions in Psoriasis Studies

During the placebo-controlled portion across the 3 clinical trials up to Week 16, the proportion of patients who experienced at least 1 serious adverse reaction (SAE; defined as resulting in death, life threatening, requires hospitalization, or persistent or significant disability/incapacity) was 0.5% in the 3 mg/kg infliximab group, 1.9% in the placebo group, and 1.6% in the 5 mg/kg infliximab group.
Among patients in the 2 Phase 3 studies, 12.4% of patients receiving infliximab 5 mg/kg every 8 weeks through 1 year of maintenance treatment experienced at least 1 SAE in Study I. In Study II, 4.1% and 4.7% of patients receiving infliximab 3 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg every 8 weeks, respectively, through 1 year of maintenance treatment experienced at least 1 SAE.
One death due to bacterial sepsis occurred 25 days after the second infusion of 5 mg/kg infliximab. Serious infections included sepsis, and abscesses. In Study I, 2.7% of patients receiving infliximab 5 mg/kg every 8 weeks through 1 year of maintenance treatment experienced at least 1 serious infection. In Study II, 1.0% and 1.3% of patients receiving infliximab 3 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg, respectively, through 1 year of treatment experienced at least 1 serious infection. The most common serious infection (requiring hospitalization) was abscess (skin, throat, and peri-rectal) reported by 5 (0.7%) patients in the 5 mg/kg infliximab group. Two active cases of tuberculosis were reported: 6 weeks and 34 weeks after starting infliximab.
In the placebo-controlled portion of the Ps studies, 7 of 1123 patients who received infliximab at any dose were diagnosed with at least one NMSC compared to 0 of 334 patients who received placebo.
In the Ps studies, 1% (15/1373) of patients experienced serum sickness or a combination of arthralgia and/or myalgia with fever, and/or rash, usually early in the treatment course. Of these patients, 6 required hospitalization due to fever, severe myalgia, arthralgia, swollen joints, and immobility.










Other Adverse Reactions in Adults

Safety data are available from 4779 adult patients treated with infliximab, including 1304 with RA, 1106 with CD, 484 with UC, 202 with AS, 293 with PsA, 1373 with Ps and 17 with other conditions. [For information on other adverse reactions in pediatric patients, see Adverse Reactions (6.1)]. Adverse reactions reported in ≥ 5% of all patients with RA receiving 4 or more infusions are in Table 2. The types and frequencies of adverse reactions observed were similar in RA, AS, PsA, Ps, and CD patients treated with infliximab except for abdominal pain, which occurred in 26% of infliximab-treated patients with CD. In the CD studies, there were insufficient numbers and duration of follow-up for patients who never received infliximab to provide meaningful comparisons.

Table 2   Adverse Reactions that Occurred in ≥ 5% of Patients who Received ≥ 4 Infliximab Infusions for RA






Placebo
Infliximab



(n = 350)
(n = 1129)


Average weeks of follow-up
59 weeks
66 weeks




  Upper respiratory tract infection
25%
32%


  Nausea
20%
21%


  Headache
14%
18%


  Sinusitis
8%
14%


  Diarrhea
12%
12%


  Abdominal pain
8%
12%


  Pharyngitis
8%
12%


  Coughing
8%
12%


  Bronchitis
9%
10%


  Rash
5%
10%


  Dyspepsia
7%
10%


  Fatigue
7%
9%


  Urinary tract infection
6%
8%


  Pain
7%
8%


  Arthralgia
7%
8%


  Pruritus
2%
7%


  Fever
4%
7%


  Hypertension
5%
7%


  Moniliasis
3%
5%



The most common serious adverse reactions observed in clinical trials were infections [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)]. Other serious, medically relevant adverse reactions ≥ 0.2% or clinically significant adverse reactions by body system were as follows:

Body as a whole: allergic reaction, edema

Blood: pancytopenia

Cardiovascular: hypotension

Gastrointestinal: constipation, intestinal obstruction

Central and Peripheral Nervous: dizziness

Heart Rate and Rhythm: bradycardia

Liver and Biliary: hepatitis

Metabolic and Nutritional: dehydration

Platelet, Bleeding and Clotting: thrombocytopenia

Neoplasms: lymphoma

Red Blood Cell: anemia, hemolytic anemia

Resistance Mechanism: cellulitis, sepsis, serum sickness, sarcoidosis

Respiratory: lower respiratory tract infection (including pneumonia), pleurisy, pulmonary edema

Skin and Appendages: increased sweating

Vascular (Extracardiac): thrombophlebitis

White Cell and Reticuloendothelial: leukopenia, lymphadenopathy












Adverse Reactions in Pediatric Patients









Adverse Reactions in Pediatric Patients with Crohn's Disease 

There were some differences in the adverse reactions observed in the pediatric patients receiving infliximab compared to those observed in adults with CD. These differences are discussed in the following paragraphs.
The following adverse reactions were reported more commonly in 103 randomized pediatric CD patients administered 5 mg/kg infliximab through 54 weeks than in 385 adult CD patients receiving a similar treatment regimen: anemia (11%), leukopenia (9%), flushing (9%), viral infection (8%), neutropenia (7%), bone fracture (7%), bacterial infection (6%), and respiratory tract allergic reaction (6%).
Infections were reported in 56% of randomized pediatric patients in Study Peds Crohn's and in 50% of adult patients in Study Crohn's I. In Study Peds Crohn's, infections were reported more frequently for patients who received every 8-week as opposed to every 12-week infusions (74% and 38%, respectively), while serious infections were reported for 3 patients in the every 8-week and 4 patients in the every 12-week maintenance treatment group. The most commonly reported infections were upper respiratory tract infection and pharyngitis, and the most commonly reported serious infection was abscess. Pneumonia was reported for 3 patients, (2 in the every 8-week and 1 in the every 12-week maintenance treatment groups). Herpes zoster was reported for 2 patients in the every 8-week maintenance treatment group.
In Study Peds Crohn's, 18% of randomized patients experienced 1 or more infusion reactions, with no notable difference between treatment groups. Of the 112 patients in Study Peds Crohn's, there were no serious infusion reactions, and 2 patients had non-serious anaphylactoid reactions.
Elevations of ALT up to 3 times the upper limit of normal (ULN) were seen in 18% of pediatric patients in CD clinical trials; 4% had ALT elevations ≥ 3 × ULN, and 1% had elevations ≥ 5 × ULN. (Median follow-up was 53 weeks).










Adverse Reactions in Pediatric Patients with Ulcerative Colitis

Overall, the adverse reactions reported in the pediatric UC trial and adult UC (Study UC I and Study UC II) studies were generally consistent. In a pediatric UC trial, the most common adverse reactions were upper respiratory tract infection, pharyngitis, abdominal pain, fever, and headache.
Infections were reported in 31 (52%) of 60 treated patients in the pediatric UC trial and 22 (37%) required oral or parenteral antimicrobial treatment. The proportion of patients with infections in the pediatric UC trial was similar to that in the pediatric CD study (Study Peds Crohn's) but higher than the proportion in the adults' UC studies (Study UC I and Study UC II). The overall incidence of infections in the pediatric UC trial was 13/22 (59%) in the every 8 week maintenance treatment group. Upper respiratory tract infection (7/60 [12%]) and pharyngitis (5/60 [8%]) were the most frequently reported respiratory system infections. Serious infections were reported in 12% (7/60) of all treated patients.
Elevations of ALT up to 3 times the upper limit of normal (ULN) were seen in 17% (10/60) of pediatric patients in the pediatric UC trial; 7% (4/60) had ALT elevations ≥ 3 × ULN, and 2% (1/60) had elevations ≥ 5 × ULN (median follow-up was 49 weeks).
Overall, 8 of 60 (13%) treated patients experienced one or more infusion reactions, including 4 of 22 (18%) patients in the every 8-week treatment maintenance group. No serious infusion reactions were reported.
In the pediatric UC trial, 45 patients were in the 12 to 17 year age group and 15 in the 6 to 11 year age group. The numbers of patients in each subgroup are too small to make any definitive conclusions about the effect of age on safety events. There were higher proportions of patients with serious adverse events (40% vs. 18%) and discontinuation due to adverse events (40% vs. 16%) in the younger age group than in the older age group. While the proportion of patients with infections was also higher in the younger age group (60% vs. 49%), for serious infections, the proportions were similar in the two age groups (13% in the 6 to 11 year age group vs. 11% in the 12 to 17 year age group). Overall proportions of adverse reactions, including infusion reactions, were similar between the 6 to 11 and 12 to 17 year age groups (13%).












6.2 Immunogenicity

The observed incidence of anti-drug antibodies is highly dependent on the sensitivity and specificity of the assay. Differences in assay methods preclude meaningful comparisons of the incidence of anti-drug antibodies in the studies described below with the incidence of anti-drug antibodies in other studies, including those of infliximab or of other infliximab products.
Treatment with infliximab products can be associated with the development of antibodies to infliximab products. An enzyme immunoassay (EIA) method was originally used to measure anti-infliximab antibodies in clinical studies of infliximab. The EIA method is subject to interference by serum infliximab, possibly resulting in an underestimation of the rate of patient antibody formation. A separate, drug-tolerant electrochemiluminescence immunoassay (ECLIA) method for detecting antibodies to infliximab was subsequently developed and validated. This method is 60-fold more sensitive than the original EIA. With the ECLIA method, all clinical samples can be classified as either positive or negative for antibodies to infliximab without the need for the inconclusive category.
The incidence of antibodies to infliximab was based on the original EIA method in all clinical studies of infliximab except for the Phase 3 study in pediatric patients with UC where the incidence of antibodies to infliximab was detected using both the EIA and ECLIA methods.








Immunogenicity in Adult Patients

The incidence of antibodies to infliximab in patients with RA and CD given a 3-dose induction regimen followed by maintenance dosing was approximately 10% as assessed through 1 to 2 years of infliximab treatment. A higher incidence of antibodies to infliximab was observed in CD patients receiving infliximab after drug-free intervals >16 weeks. In a PsA study in which 191 patients received 5 mg/kg with or without MTX, antibodies to infliximab occurred in 15% of patients. The majority of antibody-positive patients had low titers. Antibody development was lower among RA and CD patients receiving immunosuppressant therapies such as 6-MP/AZA or MTX. Patients who were antibody-positive were more likely to have higher rates of clearance, have reduced efficacy, and to experience an infusion reaction than were patients who were antibody negative [see Adverse Reactions 6.1]. In the Ps Study II, which included both the 5 mg/kg and 3 mg/kg doses, antibodies were observed in 36% of patients treated with 5 mg/kg every 8 weeks for 1 year, and in 51% of patients treated with 3 mg/kg every 8 weeks for 1 year.
In the Ps Study III, which also included both the 5 mg/kg and 3 mg/kg doses, antibodies were observed in 20% of patients treated with 5 mg/kg induction (weeks 0, 2 and 6), and in 27% of patients treated with 3 mg/kg induction. Despite the increase in antibody formation, the infusion reaction rates in Studies I and II in patients treated with 5 mg/kg induction followed by every 8 week maintenance for 1 year and in Study III in patients treated with 5 mg/kg induction (14.1%-23.0%) and serious infusion reaction rates (<1%) were similar to those observed in other study populations. The clinical significance of apparent increased immunogenicity on efficacy and infusion reactions in Ps patients as compared to patients with other diseases treated with infliximab products over the long term is not known.










Immunogenicity in Pediatric Patients with Crohn's Disease

In Study Peds Crohn's, in which all patients received stable doses of 6-MP, AZA, or MTX, excluding inconclusive samples, 3 of 24 patients had antibodies to infliximab. Although 105 patients were tested for antibodies to infliximab, 81 patients were classified as inconclusive because they could not be ruled as negative due to assay interference by the presence of infliximab in the sample.










Immunogenicity in Pediatric Patients with Ulcerative Colitis

In the pediatric UC trial, 58 patients were evaluated for antibodies to infliximab using the EIA as well as the drug-tolerant ECLIA. With the EIA, 4 of 58 (7%) patients had antibodies to infliximab. With the ECLIA, 30 of 58 (52%) patients had antibodies to infliximab. The higher incidence of antibodies to infliximab by the ECLIA method was due to the 60-fold higher sensitivity compared to the EIA method. While EIA-positive patients generally had undetectable trough concentration of infliximab, ECLIA-positive patients could have detectable trough concentrations of infliximab because the ECLIA assay is more sensitive and drug-tolerant.










6.3 Postmarketing Experience

Adverse reactions, some with fatal outcomes, have been identified during post approval use of infliximab products in adult and pediatric patients. Because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure.








Postmarketing Adverse Reactions in Adults and Pediatric Patients


Neutropenia [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)], agranulocytosis (including infants exposed in utero to infliximab products), idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Interstitial lung disease (including pulmonary fibrosis/interstitial pneumonitis and rapidly progressive disease).
Pericardial effusion, systemic and cutaneous vasculitis.
Erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson Syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, linear IgA bullous dermatosis (LABD), acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP), new onset and worsening psoriasis (all subtypes including pustular, primarily palmoplantar), lichenoid reactions.
Peripheral demyelinating disorders (such as Guillain-Barré syndrome, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, and multifocal motor neuropathy), transverse myelitis, and neuropathies (additional neurologic reactions have also been observed) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9)].
Acute liver failure, jaundice, hepatitis, and cholestasis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
Serious infections [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)] and vaccine breakthrough infection including bovine tuberculosis (disseminated BCG infection) following vaccination in an infant exposed in utero to infliximab products [see Warnings and Precautions (5.13)].
Malignancies, including leukemia, melanoma, Merkel cell carcinoma, and cervical cancer [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
Anaphylactic reactions, including anaphylactic shock, laryngeal/pharyngeal edema and severe bronchospasm, and seizure have been associated with administration of infliximab products.
Transient visual loss have been reported in association with infliximab products during or within 2 hours of infusion. Cerebrovascular accidents, myocardial ischemia/infarction (some fatal), and arrhythmia occurring within 24 hours of initiation of infusion have also been reported [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8)].











Postmarketing Serious Adverse Reactions in Pediatric Patients

The following serious adverse reactions have been reported in the post-marketing experience in pediatric patients: infections (some fatal) including opportunistic infections and tuberculosis, infusion reactions, hypersensitivity reactions, malignancies, including hepatosplenic T-cell lymphomas [see Boxed Warning and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)], transient hepatic enzyme abnormalities, lupus-like syndromes, and the development of autoantibodies.
WARNING: SERIOUS INFECTIONS and MALIGNANCY





WARNING: SERIOUS INFECTIONS and MALIGNANCY

See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning.



Increased risk of serious infections leading to hospitalization or death, including tuberculosis (TB), bacterial sepsis, invasive fungal infections (such as histoplasmosis) and infections due to other opportunistic pathogens. (5.1)


Discontinue RENFLEXIS if a patient develops a serious infection.


Perform test for latent TB; if positive, start treatment for TB prior to starting RENFLEXIS. Monitor all patients for active TB during treatment, even if initial latent TB test is negative. (5.1)


Lymphoma and other malignancies, some fatal, have been reported in children and adolescent patients treated with tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blockers, including infliximab products. (5.2)


Postmarketing cases of fatal hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma (HSTCL) have been reported in patients treated with TNF blockers including infliximab products. Almost all had received azathioprine or 6- mercaptopurine concomitantly with a TNF blocker at or prior to diagnosis. The majority of cases were reported in patients with Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis, most of whom were adolescent or young adult males. (5.2)











SERIOUS INFECTIONS


Patients treated with infliximab products are at increased risk for developing serious infections that may lead to hospitalization or death [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Adverse Reactions (6.1)]. Most patients who developed these infections were taking concomitant immunosuppressants such as methotrexate or corticosteroids.


RENFLEXIS should be discontinued if a patient develops a serious infection or sepsis.


Reported infections include:



Active tuberculosis, including reactivation of latent tuberculosis. Patients with tuberculosis have frequently presented with disseminated or extrapulmonary disease. Patients should be tested for latent tuberculosis before RENFLEXIS use and during therapy. Treatment for latent infection should be initiated prior to RENFLEXIS use.


Invasive fungal infections, including histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, candidiasis, aspergillosis, blastomycosis, and pneumocystosis. Patients with histoplasmosis or other invasive fungal infections may present with disseminated, rather than localized, disease. Antigen and antibody testing for histoplasmosis may be negative in some patients with active infection. Empiric anti-fungal therapy should be considered in patients at risk for invasive fungal infections who develop severe systemic illness.


Bacterial, viral and other infections due to opportunistic pathogens, including Legionella and Listeria.



The risks and benefits of treatment with RENFLEXIS should be carefully considered prior to initiating therapy in patients with chronic or recurrent infection.


Patients should be closely monitored for the development of signs and symptoms of infection during and after treatment with RENFLEXIS, including the possible development of tuberculosis in patients who tested negative for latent tuberculosis infection prior to initiating therapy.











MALIGNANCY


Lymphoma and other malignancies, some fatal, have been reported in children and adolescent patients treated with TNF blockers, including infliximab products [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].


Postmarketing cases of hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma (HSTCL), a rare type of T-cell lymphoma, have been reported in patients treated with TNF blockers including infliximab products. These cases have had a very aggressive disease course and have been fatal. Almost all patients had received treatment with azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine concomitantly with a TNF blocker at or prior to diagnosis. The majority of reported cases have occurred in patients with Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis and most were in adolescent and young adult males.
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS






Serious infections – do not give RENFLEXIS during an active infection. If an infection develops, monitor carefully and stop RENFLEXIS if infection becomes serious. (5.1)

Invasive fungal infections – for patients who develop a systemic illness on RENFLEXIS, consider empiric antifungal therapy for those who reside or travel to regions where mycoses are endemic (5.1)

Malignancies – the incidence of malignancies, including invasive cervical cancer and lymphoma, was greater in infliximab- treated patients than in controls. Due to the risk of HSTCL carefully assess the risk/benefit especially if the patient has Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis, is male, and is receiving azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine treatment. (5.2)

Hepatitis B virus reactivation – test for HBV infection before starting RENFLEXIS. Monitor HBV carriers during and several months after therapy. If reactivation occurs, stop RENFLEXIS and begin anti-viral therapy. (5.3)

Hepatotoxicity – severe hepatic reactions, some fatal or necessitating liver transplantation. Stop RENFLEXIS in cases of jaundice and/or marked liver enzyme elevations. (5.4)

Heart failure – new onset or worsening symptoms may occur. (4, 5.5)

Cytopenias – advise patients to seek immediate medical attention if signs and symptoms develop, and consider stopping RENFLEXIS. (5.6)

Hypersensitivity – serious infusion reactions including anaphylaxis or serum sickness-like reactions may occur. (5.7)

Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Reactions – Cerebrovascular accidents, myocardial infarctions (some fatal), and arrhythmias have been reported during and within 24 hours of initiation of infliximab product infusion. Monitor patients during RENFLEXIS infusion and if serious reaction occurs, discontinue infusion. (5.8)

Demyelinating disease – exacerbation or new onset may occur. (5.9)

Lupus-like syndrome – stop RENFLEXIS if syndrome develops. (5.12)

Vaccinations and Use of Live Vaccines/Therapeutic Infectious Agents – Prior to initiating RENFLEXIS bring pediatric and adult patients up to date with all vaccinations. Live vaccines or therapeutic infectious agents should not be given with RENFLEXIS. At least a six month waiting period following birth is recommended before the administration of live vaccines to infants exposed in utero to infliximab products (5.13).








5.1	Serious Infections

Patients treated with infliximab products are at increased risk for developing serious infections involving various organ systems and sites that may lead to hospitalization or death.
Opportunistic infections due to bacterial, mycobacterial, invasive fungal, viral, or parasitic organisms including aspergillosis, blastomycosis, candidiasis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, legionellosis, listeriosis, pneumocystosis, salmonellosis and tuberculosis have been reported with TNF blockers. Patients have frequently presented with disseminated rather than localized disease.
Treatment with RENFLEXIS should not be initiated in patients with an active infection, including clinically important localized infections. Patients greater than 65 years of age, patients with co-morbid conditions and/or patients taking concomitant immunosuppressants such as corticosteroids or methotrexate may be at greater risk of infection. The risks and benefits of treatment should be considered prior to initiating therapy in patients:

with chronic or recurrent infection;
who have been exposed to tuberculosis;
with a history of an opportunistic infection;
who have resided or traveled in areas of endemic tuberculosis or endemic mycoses, such as histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, or blastomycosis; or
with underlying conditions that may predispose them to infection.









Tuberculosis

Cases of reactivation of tuberculosis or new tuberculosis infections have been observed in patients receiving infliximab products, including patients who have previously received treatment for latent or active tuberculosis. Cases of active tuberculosis have also occurred in patients being treated with infliximab products during treatment for latent tuberculosis.
Patients should be evaluated for tuberculosis risk factors and tested for latent infection prior to initiating RENFLEXIS and periodically during therapy. Treatment of latent tuberculosis infection prior to therapy with TNF blockers has been shown to reduce the risk of tuberculosis reactivation during therapy. Induration of 5 mm or greater with tuberculin skin testing should be considered a positive test result when assessing if treatment for latent tuberculosis is needed prior to initiating RENFLEXIS, even for patients previously vaccinated with Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG).
Anti-tuberculosis therapy should also be considered prior to initiation of RENFLEXIS in patients with a past history of latent or active tuberculosis in whom an adequate course of treatment cannot be confirmed, and for patients with a negative test for latent tuberculosis but having risk factors for tuberculosis infection. Consultation with a physician with expertise in the treatment of tuberculosis is recommended to aid in the decision whether initiating anti-tuberculosis therapy is appropriate for an individual patient.
Tuberculosis should be strongly considered in patients who develop a new infection during RENFLEXIS treatment, especially in patients who have previously or recently traveled to countries with a high prevalence of tuberculosis, or who have had close contact with a person with active tuberculosis.










Monitoring

Patients should be closely monitored for the development of signs and symptoms of infection during and after treatment with RENFLEXIS, including the development of tuberculosis in patients who tested negative for latent tuberculosis infection prior to initiating therapy. Tests for latent tuberculosis infection may also be falsely negative while on therapy with RENFLEXIS.
RENFLEXIS should be discontinued if a patient develops a serious infection or sepsis. A patient who develops a new infection during treatment with RENFLEXIS should be closely monitored, undergo a prompt and complete diagnostic workup appropriate for an immunocompromised patient, and appropriate antimicrobial therapy should be initiated.










Invasive Fungal Infections

For patients who reside or travel in regions where mycoses are endemic, invasive fungal infection should be suspected if they develop a serious systemic illness. Appropriate empiric antifungal therapy should be considered while a diagnostic workup is being performed. Antigen and antibody testing for histoplasmosis may be negative in some patients with active infection. When feasible, the decision to administer empiric antifungal therapy in these patients should be made in consultation with a physician with expertise in the diagnosis and treatment of invasive fungal infections and should take into account both the risk for severe fungal infection and the risks of antifungal therapy.










5.2	Malignancies

Malignancies, some fatal, have been reported among children, adolescents and young adults who received treatment with TNF blockers (initiation of therapy ≤ 18 years of age), including infliximab products. Approximately half of these cases were lymphomas, including Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The other cases represented a variety of malignancies, including rare malignancies that are usually associated with immunosuppression and malignancies that are not usually observed in children and adolescents. The malignancies occurred after a median of 30 months (range 1 to 84 months) after the first dose of TNF blocker therapy. Most of the patients were receiving concomitant immunosuppressants. These cases were reported post-marketing and are derived from a variety of sources, including registries and spontaneous postmarketing reports.








Lymphomas

In the controlled portions of clinical trials of all the TNF blockers, more cases of lymphoma have been observed among patients receiving a TNF blocker compared with control patients. In the controlled and open-label portions of infliximab clinical trials, 5 patients developed lymphomas among 5707 patients treated with infliximab (median duration of follow-up 1.0 years) vs. 0 lymphomas in 1600 control patients (median duration of follow-up 0.4 years). In RA patients, 2 lymphomas were observed for a rate of 0.08 cases per 100 patient-years of follow-up, which is approximately three-fold higher than expected in the general population. In the combined clinical trial population for RA, CD, PsA, AS, UC, and Ps, 5 lymphomas were observed for a rate of 0.10 cases per 100 patient-years of follow-up, which is approximately four-fold higher than expected in the general population. Patients with CD, RA or Ps, particularly patients with highly active disease and/or chronic exposure to immunosuppressant therapies, may be at a higher risk (up to several fold) than the general population for the development of lymphoma, even in the absence of TNF blockers. Cases of acute and chronic leukemia have been reported with postmarketing TNF blocker use in RA and other diseases. Even in the absence of TNF blocker therapy, patients with RA may be at a higher risk (approximately 2-fold) than the general population for the development of leukemia.










Hepatosplenic T-cell Lymphoma (HSTCL)

Postmarketing cases of hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma (HSTCL), a rare type of T-cell lymphoma, have been reported in patients treated with TNF blockers including infliximab products. These cases have had a very aggressive disease course and have been fatal. Almost all patients had received treatment with the immunosuppressants azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine concomitantly with a TNF blocker at or prior to diagnosis. The majority of reported cases have occurred in patients with CD or UC and most were in adolescent and young adult males. It is uncertain whether the occurrence of HSTCL is related to TNF blockers or TNF blockers in combination with these other immunosuppressants. When treating patients, consideration of whether to use RENFLEXIS alone or in combination with other immunosuppressants such as azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine should take into account a possibility that there is a higher risk of HSTCL with combination therapy versus an observed increased risk of immunogenicity and hypersensitivity reactions with infliximab product monotherapy from the clinical trial data from studies with infliximab [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) and Adverse Reactions (6.1)].











Skin Cancer

Melanoma and Merkel cell carcinoma have been reported in patients treated with TNF blocker therapy, including infliximab products [see Adverse Reactions (6.3)]. Periodic skin examination is recommended for all patients, particularly those with risk factors for skin cancer.










Cervical Cancer

A population-based retrospective cohort study using data from Swedish national health registries found a 2 to 3 fold increase in the incidence of invasive cervical cancer in women with RA treated with infliximab compared to biologics-naïve patients or the general population, particularly those over 60 years of age. A causal relationship between infliximab products and cervical cancer cannot be excluded. Periodic screening should continue in women treated with RENFLEXIS [see Adverse Reactions (6.3)].










Other Malignancies

In the controlled portions of clinical trials of some TNF blockers including infliximab products, more malignancies (excluding lymphoma and nonmelanoma skin cancer [NMSC]) have been observed in patients receiving those TNF blockers compared with control patients. During the controlled portions of infliximab trials in patients with moderately to severely active RA, CD, PsA, AS, UC, and Ps, 14 patients were diagnosed with malignancies (excluding lymphoma and NMSC) among 4019 infliximab-treated patients vs. 1 among 1597 control patients (at a rate of 0.52/100 patient-years among infliximab-treated patients vs. a rate of 0.11/100 patient-years among control patients), with median duration of follow-up 0.5 years for infliximab-treated patients and 0.4 years for control patients. Of these, the most common malignancies were breast, colorectal, and melanoma. The rate of malignancies among infliximab-treated patients was similar to that expected in the general population whereas the rate in control patients was lower than expected.
In a clinical trial exploring the use of infliximab in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), more malignancies, the majority of lung or head and neck origin, were reported in infliximab-treated patients compared with control patients. All patients had a history of heavy smoking [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)]. Prescribers should exercise caution when considering the use of RENFLEXIS in patients with moderate to severe COPD.
Ps patients should be monitored for nonmelanoma skin cancers (NMSCs), particularly those patients who have had prior prolonged phototherapy treatment. In the maintenance portion of clinical trials for infliximab, NMSCs were more common in patients with previous phototherapy [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)].
The potential role of TNF blockers in the development of malignancies is not known [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)]. Rates in clinical trials for infliximab cannot be compared to rates in clinical trials of other TNF blockers and may not predict rates observed in a broader patient population. Caution should be exercised in considering RENFLEXIS treatment in patients with a history of malignancy or in continuing treatment in patients who develop malignancy while receiving RENFLEXIS.










5.3	Hepatitis B Virus Reactivation

Use of TNF blockers, including infliximab products, has been associated with reactivation of hepatitis B virus (HBV) in patients who are chronic carriers of this virus. In some instances, HBV reactivation occurring in conjunction with TNF blocker therapy has been fatal. The majority of these reports have occurred in patients concomitantly receiving other medications that suppress the immune system, which may also contribute to HBV reactivation. Patients should be tested for HBV infection before initiating TNF blocker therapy, including RENFLEXIS. For patients who test positive for hepatitis B surface antigen, consultation with a physician with expertise in the treatment of hepatitis B is recommended. Adequate data are not available on the safety or efficacy of treating patients who are carriers of HBV with anti-viral therapy in conjunction with TNF blocker therapy to prevent HBV reactivation. Patients who are carriers of HBV and require treatment with TNF blockers should be closely monitored for clinical and laboratory signs of active HBV infection throughout therapy and for several months following termination of therapy. In patients who develop HBV reactivation, TNF blockers should be stopped and antiviral therapy with appropriate supportive treatment should be initiated. The safety of resuming TNF blocker therapy after HBV reactivation is controlled is not known. Therefore, prescribers should exercise caution when considering resumption of TNF blocker therapy in this situation and monitor patients closely.








5.4	Hepatotoxicity

Severe hepatic reactions, including acute liver failure, jaundice, hepatitis and cholestasis, have been reported in postmarketing data in patients receiving infliximab products. Autoimmune hepatitis has been diagnosed in some of these cases. Severe hepatic reactions occurred between 2 weeks to more than 1 year after initiation of infliximab products; elevations in hepatic aminotransferase levels were not noted prior to discovery of the liver injury in many of these cases. Some of these cases were fatal or necessitated liver transplantation. Patients with symptoms or signs of liver dysfunction should be evaluated for evidence of liver injury. If jaundice and/or marked liver enzyme elevations (e.g., ≥ 5 times the upper limit of normal) develop, RENFLEXIS should be discontinued, and a thorough investigation of the abnormality should be undertaken. In clinical trials, mild or moderate elevations of ALT and AST have been observed in patients receiving infliximab products without progression to severe hepatic injury [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)].








5.5	Heart Failure


The use of RENFLEXIS at doses >5 mg/kg is contraindicated in patients with moderate or severe heart failure. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study evaluated the use of infliximab (5 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg at Weeks 0, 2, and 6) in patients with moderate or severe heart failure [New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Class III/IV]. Compared to patients who received placebo, there was a higher rate of mortality and a higher risk of hospitalization at Week 28 due to heart failure in patients who received the 10 mg/kg infliximab dose, and higher rates of cardiovascular adverse events in patients who received infliximab doses of 5 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg.

There have been post-marketing reports of new onset and worsening heart failure, with and without identifiable precipitating factors (e.g., pre-existing cardiovascular disease), in patients treated with infliximab products. Some of these patients have been under 50 years of age.
If a decision is made to administer RENFLEXIS (≤ 5 mg/kg) to patients with moderate or severe heart failure or to administer RENFLEXIS (any approved dose) to patients with mild heart failure, they should be closely monitored during therapy, and RENFLEXIS should be discontinued if new or worsening symptoms of heart failure appear [see Contraindications (4) and Adverse Reactions (6.1)].








5.6	Hematologic Reactions

Cases of leukopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and pancytopenia, some with a fatal outcome, have been reported in patients receiving infliximab products. The causal relationship to infliximab product therapy remains unclear. Although no high-risk group(s) has been identified, caution should be exercised in patients being treated with RENFLEXIS who have ongoing or a history of significant hematologic abnormalities. All patients should be advised to seek immediate medical attention if they develop signs and symptoms suggestive of blood dyscrasias or infection (e.g., persistent fever) while on RENFLEXIS. Discontinuation of RENFLEXIS therapy should be considered in patients who develop significant hematologic abnormalities.








5.7	Hypersensitivity

Infliximab products have been associated with hypersensitivity reactions that vary in their time of onset and required hospitalization in some cases. Most hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylaxis, urticaria, dyspnea, and/or hypotension), have occurred during or within 2 hours of infliximab product infusion.
However, in some cases, serum sickness-like reactions have been observed in patients after initial therapy with infliximab products (i.e., as early as after the second dose), and when therapy with infliximab products was reinstituted following an extended period without treatment. Symptoms associated with these reactions include fever, rash, headache, sore throat, myalgias, polyarthralgias, hand and facial edema and/or dysphagia. These reactions were associated with a marked increase in antibodies to infliximab products, loss of detectable serum concentrations of infliximab products, and possible loss of drug efficacy.
RENFLEXIS should be discontinued for severe hypersensitivity reactions. Medications for the treatment of hypersensitivity reactions (e.g., acetaminophen, antihistamines, corticosteroids and/or epinephrine) should be available for immediate use in the event of a reaction [see Dosage and Administration (2.10) and Adverse Reactions (6.1)].
In RA, CD and Ps clinical trials, re-administration of infliximab after a period of no treatment resulted in a higher incidence of infusion reactions relative to regular maintenance treatment [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)]. In general, the benefit-risk of re-administration of RENFLEXIS after a period of no-treatment, especially as a re-induction regimen given at weeks 0, 2 and 6, should be carefully considered. In the case where RENFLEXIS maintenance therapy for Ps is interrupted, RENFLEXIS should be reinitiated as a single dose followed by maintenance therapy.








5.8	Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Reactions During and After Infusion

Serious cerebrovascular accidents, myocardial ischemia/infarction (some fatal), hypotension, hypertension, and arrhythmias have been reported during and within 24 hours of initiation of infliximab product infusion. Cases of transient visual loss have been reported during or within 2 hours of infusion of infliximab product. Monitor patients during infusion and if serious reaction occurs, discontinue infusion. Further management of reactions should be dictated by signs and symptoms [see Adverse Reactions (6)].








5.9	Neurologic Reactions

Agents that inhibit TNF have been associated with CNS manifestation of systemic vasculitis, seizure and new onset or exacerbation of clinical symptoms and/or radiographic evidence of central nervous system demyelinating disorders, including multiple sclerosis and optic neuritis, and peripheral demyelinating disorders, including Guillain-Barré syndrome. Prescribers should exercise caution in considering the use of RENFLEXIS in patients with these neurologic disorders and should consider discontinuation of RENFLEXIS if these disorders develop.








5.10	Concurrent Administration with Other Biological Products

Serious infections and neutropenia were seen in clinical studies with concurrent use of anakinra and another TNF blocker, etanercept, with no added clinical benefit compared to etanercept alone. Because of the nature of the adverse reactions seen with the concurrent use of etanercept and anakinra therapy, similar toxicities may also result from the concurrent use of anakinra and other TNF blockers. Therefore, the concurrent use of RENFLEXIS and anakinra is not recommended.
In clinical studies, concurrent administration of TNF blockers and abatacept have been associated with an increased risk of infections including serious infections compared with TNF blockers alone, without increased clinical benefit. Therefore, the concurrent use of RENFLEXIS and abatacept is not recommended [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].
There is insufficient information regarding the concurrent use of infliximab products with other biological products used to treat the same conditions as RENFLEXIS. The concurrent use of RENFLEXIS with these biological products is not recommended because of the possibility of an increased risk of infection [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].








5.11	Switching Between Biological Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs (DMARDs)

Care should be taken when switching from one biologic to another, since overlapping biological activity may further increase the risk of infection.








5.12	Autoimmunity

Treatment with infliximab products may result in the formation of autoantibodies and in the development of a lupus-like syndrome. If a patient develops symptoms suggestive of a lupus-like syndrome following treatment with RENFLEXIS, treatment should be discontinued [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)].








5.13	Vaccinations and Use of Live Vaccines/Therapeutic Infectious Agents








Vaccinations


Prior to initiating RENFLEXIS in pediatric and adult patients, update vaccinations in accordance with current vaccination guidelines.










Live Vaccines and Therapeutic Infectious Agents

In patients receiving TNF blockers, limited data are available on the response to vaccination with live vaccines or on the secondary transmission of infection by live vaccines. Use of live vaccines can result in clinical infections, including disseminated infections. The concurrent administration of live vaccines with RENFLEXIS is not recommended.
Fatal outcome due to disseminated BCG infection has been reported in an infant who received a BCG vaccine after in utero exposure to infliximab products. Infliximab products are known to cross the placenta and have been detected up to 6 months following birth. At least a six month waiting period following birth is recommended before the administration of any live vaccine to infants exposed in utero to infliximab products.
Other uses of therapeutic infectious agents such as live attenuated bacteria (e.g., BCG bladder instillation for the treatment of cancer) could result in clinical infections, including disseminated infections. It is recommended that therapeutic infectious agents not be given concurrently with RENFLEXIS.
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS





8.1	Pregnancy







Risk Summary

Available observational studies in pregnant women exposed to infliximab products showed no increased risk of major malformations among live births as compared to those exposed to non-biologics. However, findings on other birth and maternal outcomes were not consistent across studies of different study design and conduct [see Data].
Monoclonal antibodies such as infliximab products are transferred across the placenta during the third trimester of pregnancy and may affect immune response in the in utero exposed infant [see Clinical Considerations]. Because infliximab products do not cross-react with TNFα in species other than humans and chimpanzees, animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with infliximab products. In a developmental study conducted in mice using an analogous antibody, no evidence of maternal toxicity or fetal harm was observed [see Data].
All pregnancies have a background risk of birth defect, loss, or other adverse outcomes.
The estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated populations is unknown. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2-4% and 15-20%, respectively.










Clinical Considerations









Disease-Associated Maternal and/or Embryo/Fetal Risk

Published data suggest that there is an increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes in women with inflammatory bowel disease or rheumatoid arthritis associated with increased disease activity. Adverse pregnancy outcomes include preterm delivery (before 37 weeks of gestation), low birth weight (less than 2.5 kg) and small for gestational age at birth.










Fetal/Neonatal adverse reactions

As with other IgG antibodies, infliximab products cross the placenta. Infliximab products have been detected in the serum of infants up to 6 months following birth. Consequently, these infants may be at increased risk of infection, including disseminated infection which can become fatal. At least a six month waiting period following birth is recommended before the administration of live vaccines (e.g., BCG vaccine or other live vaccines, such as the rotavirus vaccine) to these infants [see Warnings and Precautions (5.13)]. Cases of agranulocytosis in infants exposed in utero have also been reported [see Adverse Reactions (6.2)].












Data









Human Data

Two prospective cohort studies were conducted assessing birth outcomes as well as the health status of infants up to the age of one year in women exposed to infliximab compared to non-biologic comparators including methotrexate, azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine and systemic corticosteroids used for the treatment of similar diseases. The first study was conducted in an IBD pregnancy registry in the United States and assessed pregnancy outcomes in 294 women with inflammatory bowel disease exposed to infliximab during pregnancy compared with 515 women on a non-biologic treatment. Infliximab exposure was not associated with increased rates of major congenital malformations, miscarriage/stillbirth, infants of low birth weight, small for gestational age, or infection in the first year of life. The second study among IBD and non-IBD patients in Sweden, Finland, and Denmark compared 97, 7, and 166 women exposed to infliximab to 2,693, 2,499 and 1,268 women on non-biologic systemic therapy, respectively. In this study, comparing pooled data across the three countries, exposure to infliximab was not associated with increased rates of congenital anomalies or infant death. Infliximab in combination with immunosuppressants (mainly systemic corticosteroids and azathioprine) was associated with increased rates of preterm birth, small for gestational age, low birth weight, and infant hospitalization for infection compared with non-biologic systemic treatment. Although the study did not show any associations with infliximab monotherapy, the analyses could have been underpowered to detect an association.
There were additional methodological limitations with these studies that may account for the study findings in both studies: the concomitant use of other medications or treatments was not controlled and disease severity was not assessed; in the U.S. study, patient reported outcomes were collected without clinical validation. These methodological limitations hinder interpretation of the study results.










Animal Data

Because infliximab products do not cross-react with TNFα in species other than humans and chimpanzees, animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with infliximab products. An embryofetal development study was conducted in pregnant mice using cV1q anti-mouse TNFα, an analogous antibody that selectively inhibits the functional activity of mouse TNFα. This antibody administered in mice, during the period of organogenesis on gestation days (GDs) 6 and 12, at IV doses up to 40 mg/kg produced no evidence of maternal toxicity, fetal mortality, or structural abnormalities. Doses of 10 to 15 mg/kg in pharmacodynamic animal models with the anti-TNF analogous antibody produced maximal pharmacologic effectiveness. Analyses of fetal samples on GD 14 indicated placental transfer of the antibody and exposure of the fetuses during organogenesis. In a peri- and post-natal development study in mice, no maternal toxicity or adverse developmental effects in offspring were observed when dams were administered IV doses of 10 or 40 mg/kg of the analogous antibody on GDs 6, 12 and 18 and lactation days 3, 9 and 15.












8.2	Lactation







Risk Summary

Published literature show that infliximab is present at low levels in human milk. Systemic exposure in a breastfed infant is expected to be low because infliximab products are largely degraded in the gastrointestinal tract. A U.S. multi-center study of 168 women treated with infliximab for inflammatory bowel disease (breast milk samples obtained, n=29) showed that infants exposed to infliximab through breast milk had no increase in rates of infections and developed normally. There are no data on the effects of infliximab products on milk production. The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother's clinical need for RENFLEXIS and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed child from RENFLEXIS or from the underlying maternal condition.










8.4 Pediatric Use

The safety and effectiveness of RENFLEXIS have been established in pediatric patients 6 to 17 years of age for induction and maintenance treatment of CD and UC [see Dosage and Administration (2.2, 2.4) and Adverse Reactions (6.1)]. However, the safety and effectiveness of RENFLEXIS in pediatric patients <6 years of age with CD or UC have not been established. The safety and effectiveness of RENFLEXIS in the treatment of pediatric patients with Ps and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) have not been established.








Pediatric Crohn's Disease

The safety and effectiveness of RENFLEXIS have been established for reducing signs and symptoms and inducing and maintaining clinical remission in pediatric patients 6 years of age and older with moderately to severely active CD who have had an inadequate response to conventional therapy. The use of RENFLEXIS for this indication is supported by RENFLEXIS's approval as a biosimilar to infliximab and evidence from a randomized, open-label pediatric CD study of infliximab in 112 pediatric patients aged 6 years and older [see Clinical Studies (14.2)].
Infliximab has been studied only in combination with conventional immunosuppressive therapy in pediatric CD. The longer term (greater than 1 year) safety and effectiveness of infliximab products in pediatric CD patients have not been established in clinical trials.
Postmarketing cases of HSTCL have been reported in pediatric patients treated with TNF blockers including infliximab products. Due to the risk of HSTCL, a careful risk-benefit assessment should be made when RENFLEXIS is used in combination with other immunosuppressants in pediatric CD patients [see Boxed Warning, Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].










Pediatric Ulcerative Colitis

The safety and effectiveness of RENFLEXIS for reducing signs and symptoms and inducing and maintaining clinical remission in pediatric patients aged 6 years and older with moderately to severely active UC who have had an inadequate response to conventional therapy have been established. The use of RENFLEXIS for this indication is supported by RENFLEXIS's approval as a biosimilar to infliximab and evidence from adequate and well-controlled studies of infliximab in adults with additional safety and pharmacokinetic data from an open-label pediatric UC study in 60 pediatric patients aged 6 years and older [see Dosage and Administration (2.4), Adverse Reactions (6.1), and Clinical Studies (14.4)]. The effectiveness of infliximab in inducing and maintaining mucosal healing in pediatric UC was not established. Although 41 patients had a Mayo endoscopy subscore of 0 or 1 at the Week 8 endoscopy, the induction phase was open-label and lacked a control group. Only 9 patients had an optional endoscopy at Week 54. Approximately half of the patients were on concomitant immunomodulators (AZA, 6-MP, MTX) at study start.
Due to the risk of HSTCL, a careful risk-benefit assessment should be made when RENFLEXIS is used in combination with other immunosuppressants in pediatric UC patients [see Boxed Warning and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].

The longer term (greater than 1 year) safety and effectiveness of infliximab products in pediatric UC patients have not been established in clinical trials.










Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis (JRA)

The safety and effectiveness of RENFLEXIS in the treatment of pediatric patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) have not been established.
The safety and efficacy of RENFLEXIS in patients with JRA is based on RENFLEXIS's approval as a biosimilar to infliximab and evaluation of infliximab in a multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study for 14 weeks, followed by a double-blind, all-active treatment extension, for a maximum of 44 weeks. Patients with active JRA between the ages of 4 and 17 years who had been treated with MTX for at least 3 months were enrolled. Concurrent use of folic acid, oral corticosteroids (≤ 0.2 mg/kg/day of prednisone or equivalent), NSAIDs, and/or disease modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) was permitted.
Doses of 3 mg/kg infliximab or placebo were administered intravenously at Weeks 0, 2 and 6. Patients randomized to placebo crossed-over to receive 6 mg/kg infliximab at Weeks 14, 16, and 20, and then every 8 weeks through Week 44. Patients who completed the study continued to receive open-label treatment with infliximab for up to 2 years in a companion extension study.
The study failed to establish the efficacy of infliximab in the treatment of JRA. Key observations in the study included a high placebo response rate and a higher rate of immunogenicity than what has been observed in adults. Additionally, a higher rate of clearance of infliximab was observed than had been observed in adults.
Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed that in pediatric patients with JRA with a body weight of up to 35 kg receiving 6 mg/kg infliximab and pediatric patients with JRA with body weight greater than 35 kg up to adult body weight receiving 3 mg/kg infliximab, the steady state area under the concentration curve (AUCss) was similar to that observed in adults receiving 3 mg/kg of infliximab.
A total of 60 patients with JRA were treated with doses of 3 mg/kg and 57 patients were treated with doses of 6 mg/kg. The proportion of patients with infusion reactions who received 3 mg/kg infliximab was 35% (21/60) over 52 weeks compared with 18% (10/57) in patients who received 6 mg/kg over 38 weeks. The most common infusion reactions reported were vomiting, fever, headache, and hypotension. In the 3 mg/kg infliximab group, 4 patients had a serious infusion reaction and 3 patients reported a possible anaphylactic reaction (2 of which were among the serious infusion reactions). In the 6 mg/kg infliximab group, 2 patients had a serious infusion reaction, 1 of whom had a possible anaphylactic reaction. Two of the 6 patients who experienced serious infusion reactions received infliximab by rapid infusion (duration of less than 2 hours). Antibodies to infliximab developed in 38% (20/53) of patients who received 3 mg/kg infliximab compared with 12% (6/49) of patients who received 6 mg/kg.
A total of 68% (41/60) of patients who received 3 mg/kg infliximab in combination with MTX experienced an infection over 52 weeks compared with 65% (37/57) of patients who received 6 mg/kg infliximab in combination with MTX over 38 weeks. The most commonly reported infections were upper respiratory tract infection and pharyngitis, and the most commonly reported serious infection was pneumonia. Other notable infections included primary varicella infection in 1 patient and herpes zoster in 1 patient.










8.5 Geriatric Use

Of the total number of infliximab-treated patients in RA and Ps clinical studies, 256 (9.6%) were 65 years old and over, while 17 (0.6%) were 75 years old and over. In these trials, no overall differences in safety or effectiveness were observed between geriatric patients (patients ≥ 65 years old) and younger adult patients (patients 18 to 65 years old). However, the incidence of serious adverse reactions in geriatric patients was higher in both infliximab and control groups compared to younger adult patients.
Of the total number of infliximab-treated patients in CD, UC, AS, and PsA clinical studies, 76 (3.2%) were 65 years old and over, while 9 (0.4%) were 75 years old and over. In the CD, UC, AS, and PsA studies, there were insufficient numbers of geriatric patients to determine whether they respond differently from younger adults.
The incidence of serious infections in infliximab-treated geriatric patients was greater than in infliximab-treated younger adult patients; therefore close monitoring of geriatric patients for the development of serious infections is recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1), and Adverse Reactions (6.1)].
10 OVERDOSAGE

Single doses up to 20 mg/kg have been administered without any direct toxic effect. In case of overdosage, it is recommended that the patient be monitored for any signs or symptoms of adverse reactions or effects [see Warnings and Precautions (5)] and appropriate symptomatic treatment instituted immediately.