ADVERSE REACTIONS

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in clinical practice. 
Itraconazole has been associated with rare cases of serious hepatotoxicity, including liver failure and death. Some of these cases had neither pre-existing liver disease nor a serious underlying medical condition. If clinical signs or symptoms develop that are consistent with liver disease, treatment should be discontinued and liver function testing performed. The risks and benefits of itraconazole use should be reassessed. (See WARNINGS: Hepatic Effects and PRECAUTIONS: Hepatotoxicity and Information for Patients.)





Adverse Events in the Treatment of Systemic Fungal Infections

Adverse event data were derived from 602 patients treated for systemic fungal disease in U.S. clinical trials who were immunocompromised or receiving multiple concomitant medications. Treatment was discontinued in 10.5% of patients due to adverse events. The median duration before discontinuation of therapy was 81 days (range: 2 to 776 days). The table lists adverse events reported by at least 1% of patients.

 Table 3: Clinical Trials of Systemic Fungal Infections: Adverse Events Occurring with an Incidence of Greater than or Equal to 1% 







*Rash tends to occur more frequently in immunocompromised patients receiving immunosuppressive medications.






 Body System/Adverse Event 


 Incidence (%) (N=602)




 Gastrointestinal 
 Nausea  Vomiting  Diarrhea  Abdominal Pain  Anorexia
11  5  3  2  1



 Body as a Whole 
 Edema  Fatigue  Fever  Malaise
4  3  3  1



 Skin and Appendages 
 Rash*  Pruritus
9  3



 Central/Peripheral Nervous System 
 Headache  Dizziness
4  2



 Psychiatric 
 Libido Decreased  Somnolence
1  1



 Cardiovascular 
 Hypertension
3



 Metabolic/Nutritional 
 Hypokalemia
2



 Urinary System 
 Albuminuria
1



 Liver and Biliary System 
 Hepatic Function Abnormal
3



 Reproductive System, Male 
 Impotence
1



Adverse events infrequently reported in all studies included constipation, gastritis, depression, insomnia, tinnitus, menstrual disorder, adrenal insufficiency, gynecomastia, and male breast pain.







Adverse Events Reported in Toenail Onychomycosis Clinical Trials

Patients in these trials were on a continuous dosing regimen of 200 mg once daily for 12 consecutive weeks.
The following adverse events led to temporary or permanent discontinuation of therapy.

 Table 4: Clinical Trials of Onychomycosis of the Toenail: Adverse Events Leading to Temporary or Permanent Discontinuation of Therapy 







 Adverse Event 


 Incidence (%) 

 Itraconazole (N=112)



Elevated Liver Enzymes (greater than twice the upper limit of normal)
4


Gastrointestinal Disorders
4


Rash
3


Hypertension
2


Orthostatic Hypotension
1


Headache
1


Malaise
1


Myalgia
1


Vasculitis
1


Vertigo
1



The following adverse events occurred with an incidence of greater than or equal to 1% (N=112): headache: 10%; rhinitis: 9%; upper respiratory tract infection: 8%; sinusitis, injury: 7%; diarrhea, dyspepsia, flatulence, abdominal pain, dizziness, rash: 4%; cystitis, urinary tract infection, liver function abnormality, myalgia, nausea: 3%; appetite increased, constipation, gastritis, gastroenteritis, pharyngitis, asthenia, fever, pain, tremor, herpes zoster, abnormal dreaming: 2%.







Adverse Events Reported in Fingernail Onychomycosis Clinical Trials

Patients in these trials were on a dosing regimen consisting of two 1-week treatment periods of 200 mg twice daily, separated by a 3-week period without drug.
The following adverse events led to temporary or permanent discontinuation of therapy.

 Table 5:       Clinical Trials of Onychomycosis of the Fingernail: Adverse Events Leading to Temporary or Permanent Discontinuation of Therapy 








 Adverse Event 


 Incidence (%) 

 Itraconazole (N=37)



Rash/Pruritus
3


Hypertriglyceridemia
3



The following adverse events occurred with an incidence of greater than or equal to 1% (N=37): headache: 8%; pruritus, nausea, rhinitis: 5%; rash, bursitis, anxiety, depression, constipation, abdominal pain, dyspepsia, ulcerative stomatitis, gingivitis, hypertriglyceridemia, sinusitis, fatigue, malaise, pain, injury: 3%.







Adverse Events Reported from Other Clinical Trials

In addition, the following adverse drug reaction was reported in patients who participated in itraconazole capsules clinical trials: Hepatobiliary Disorders: hyperbilirubinemia.
The following is a list of additional adverse drug reactions associated with itraconazole that have been reported in clinical trials of itraconazole oral solution and itraconazole IV excluding the adverse reaction term "Injection site inflammation" which is specific to the injection route of administration:

Cardiac Disorders: cardiac failure, left ventricular failure, tachycardia;

General Disorders and Administration Site Conditions: face edema, chest pain, chills;

Hepatobiliary Disorders: hepatic failure, jaundice;

Investigations: alanine aminotransferase increased, aspartate aminotransferase increased, blood alkaline phosphatase increased, blood lactate dehydrogenase increased, blood urea increased, gamma-glutamyltransferase increased, urine analysis abnormal;

Metabolism and Nutrition Disorders: hyperglycemia, hyperkalemia, hypomagnesemia;

Psychiatric Disorders: confusional state;

Renal and Urinary Disorders: renal impairment;

Respiratory, Thoracic and Mediastinal Disorders: dysphonia, cough;

Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue Disorders: rash erythematous, hyperhidrosis;

Vascular Disorders: hypotension







Post-marketing Experience

Adverse drug reactions that have been first identified during post-marketing experience with itraconazole(all formulations) are listed in the table below. Because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, reliably estimating their frequency or establishing a causal relationship to drug exposure is not always possible.

 Table 6: Post-marketing Reports of Adverse Drug Reactions 







 Blood and Lymphatic System Disorders: 

Leukopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia



 Immune System Disorders: 

Anaphylaxis; anaphylactic, anaphylactoid and allergic reactions; serum sickness; angioneurotic edema



 Nervous System Disorders: 

Peripheral neuropathy, paresthesia, hypoesthesia, tremor



 Eye Disorders: 

Visual disturbances, including vision blurred and diplopia



 Ear and Labyrinth Disorders: 

Transient or permanent hearing loss



 Cardiac Disorders: 

Congestive heart failure



 Respiratory, Thoracic and Mediastinal Disorders: 

Pulmonary edema, dyspnea



 Gastrointestinal Disorders: 

Pancreatitis, dysgeusia



 Hepatobiliary Disorders: 

Serious hepatotoxicity (including some cases of fatal acute liver failure), hepatitis



 Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue Disorders: 

Toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, erythema multiforme, exfoliative dermatitis, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, alopecia, photosensitivity, urticaria



 Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue Disorders: 

Arthralgia



 Renal and Urinary Disorders: 

Urinary incontinence, pollakiuria



 Reproductive System and Breast Disorders: 

Erectile dysfunction



 General Disorders and Administration Site Conditions:

Peripheral edema



 Investigations:

Blood creatine phosphokinase increased



There is limited information on the use of itraconazole during pregnancy. Cases of congenital abnormalities including skeletal, genitourinary tract, cardiovascular and ophthalmic malformations as well as chromosomal and multiple malformations have been reported during post-marketing experience. A causal relationship with itraconazole has not been established. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Special Populations, CONTRAINDICATIONS, WARNINGS, and PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions for more information.)
BOXED WARNING


Congestive Heart Failure, Cardiac Effects and Drug Interactions



Congestive Heart Failure and Cardiac Effects:


• Itraconazole capsules should not be administered for the treatment of onychomycosis in patients with evidence of ventricular dysfunction such as congestive heart failure (CHF) or a history of CHF. If signs or symptoms of congestive heart failure occur during administration of itraconazole capsules, discontinue administration.



• When itraconazole was administered intravenously to dogs and healthy human volunteers, negative inotropic effects were seen. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS, WARNINGS, PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions, ADVERSE REACTIONS: Post-marketing Experience, and CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Special Populations for more information.)




Drug Interactions:


• Coadministration of a number of CYP3A4 substrates are contraindicated with itraconazole capsules. Some examples of drugs that are contraindicated for coadministration with itraconazole capsules are: methadone, disopyramide, dofetilide, dronedarone, quinidine, isavuconazole, ergot alkaloids (such as dihydroergotamine, ergometrine (ergonovine), ergotamine, methylergometrine (methylergonovine)), irinotecan, lurasidone, oral midazolam, pimozide, triazolam, felodipine, nisoldipine, ivabradine, ranolazine, eplerenone, cisapride, naloxegol, lomitapide, lovastatin, simvastatin, avanafil, ticagrelor, finerenone, voclosporin.



• Coadministration with colchicine, fesoterodine and solifenacin is contraindicated in subjects with varying degrees of renal or hepatic impairment.



• Coadministration with eliglustat is contraindicated in subjects that are poor or intermediate metabolizers of CYP2D6 and in subjects taking strong or moderate CYP2D6 inhibitors.



• Coadministration with venetoclax is contraindicated in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)/small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL) during the dose initiation and ramp-up phase of venetoclax. See PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions Section for specific examples.



• Coadministration with itraconazole can cause elevated plasma concentrations of these drugs and may increase or prolong both the pharmacologic effects and/or adverse reactions to these drugs. For example, increased plasma concentrations of some of these drugs can lead to QT prolongation and ventricular tachyarrhythmias including occurrences of torsades de pointes, a potentially fatal arrhythmia. See CONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGS Sections, and PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions Section for specific examples.
WARNINGS




Hepatic Effects:


Itraconazole has been associated with rare cases of serious hepatotoxicity, including liver failure and death. Some of these cases had neither pre-existing liver disease nor a serious underlying medical condition, and some of these cases developed within the first week of treatment. If clinical signs or symptoms develop that are consistent with liver disease, treatment should be discontinued and liver function testing performed. Continued itraconazole use or reinstitution of treatment with itraconazole is strongly discouraged unless there is a serious or life-threatening situation where the expected benefit exceeds the risk. (See PRECAUTIONS: Information for Patients and ADVERSE REACTIONS.) 








Cardiac Dysrhythmias:

Life-threatening cardiac dysrhythmias and/or sudden death have occurred in patients using drugs such as cisapride, pimozide, methadone, or quinidine concomitantly with itraconazole and/or other CYP3A4 inhibitors. Concomitant administration of these drugs with itraconazole is contraindicated. (See BOXED WARNING, CONTRAINDICATIONS, and PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions.)







Cardiac Disease:


Itraconazole capsules should not be administered for the treatment of onychomycosis in patients with evidence of ventricular dysfunction such as congestive heart failure (CHF) or a history of CHF. Itraconazole capsules should not be used for other indications in patients with evidence of ventricular dysfunction unless the benefit clearly outweighs the risk.
For patients with risk factors for congestive heart failure, physicians should carefully review the risks and benefits of itraconazole therapy. These risk factors include cardiac disease such as ischemic and valvular disease; significant pulmonary disease such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; and renal failure and other edematous disorders. Such patients should be informed of the signs and symptoms of CHF, should be treated with caution, and should be monitored for signs and symptoms of CHF during treatment. If signs or symptoms of CHF appear during administration of itraconazole capsules, discontinue administration.
Itraconazole has been shown to have a negative inotropic effect. When itraconazole was administered intravenously to anesthetized dogs, a dose-related negative inotropic effect was documented. In a healthy volunteer study of itraconazole intravenous infusion, transient, asymptomatic decreases in left ventricular ejection fraction were observed using gated SPECT imaging; these resolved before the next infusion, 12 hours later.
Itraconazole has been associated with reports of congestive heart failure. In post-marketing experience, heart failure was more frequently reported in patients receiving a total daily dose of 400 mg although there were also cases reported among those receiving lower total daily doses.
Calcium channel blockers can have negative inotropic effects which may be additive to those of itraconazole. In addition, itraconazole can inhibit the metabolism of calcium channel blockers. Therefore, caution should be used when co-administering itraconazole and calcium channel blockers due to an increased risk of CHF. Concomitant administration of itraconazole and felodipine or nisoldipine is contraindicated.
Cases of CHF, peripheral edema, and pulmonary edema have been reported in the post-marketing period among patients being treated for onychomycosis and/or systemic fungal infections. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Special Populations, CONTRAINDICATIONS, PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions, and ADVERSE REACTIONS: Post-marketing Experience for more information.)







Interaction Potential:

Itraconazole has a potential for clinically important drug interactions. Coadministration of specific drugs with itraconazole may result in changes in efficacy of itraconazole and/or the coadministered drug, life-threatening effects and/or sudden death. Drugs that are contraindicated, not recommended or recommended for use with caution in combination with itraconazole are listed in PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions.







Interchangeability:

Itraconazole capsules and itraconazole oral solution should not be used interchangeably. This is because drug exposure is greater with the oral solution than with the capsules when the same dose of drug is given. In addition, the topical effects of mucosal exposure may be different between the two formulations. Only the oral solution has been demonstrated effective for oral and/or esophageal candidiasis.
PRECAUTIONS




General:

Itraconazole capsules should be administered after a full meal. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism).
Under fasted conditions, itraconazole absorption was decreased in the presence of decreased gastric acidity. The absorption of itraconazole may be decreased with the concomitant administration of antacids or gastric acid secretion suppressors. Studies conducted under fasted conditions demonstrated that administration with 8 ounces of a non-diet cola beverage resulted in increased absorption of itraconazole in AIDS patients with relative or absolute achlorhydria. This increase relative to the effects of a full meal is unknown. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism).







Hepatotoxicity:

Rare cases of serious hepatotoxicity have been observed with itraconazole treatment, including some cases within the first week. It is recommended that liver function monitoring be considered in all patients receiving itraconazole. Treatment should be stopped immediately and liver function testing should be conducted in patients who develop signs and symptoms suggestive of liver dysfunction.







Neuropathy:

If neuropathy occurs that may be attributable to itraconazole capsules, the treatment should be discontinued.







Immunocompromised Patients:

In some immunocompromised patients (e.g., neutropenic, AIDS or organ transplant patients), the oral bioavailability of itraconazole capsules may be decreased. Therefore, the dose should be adjusted based on the clinical response in these patients.







Cystic Fibrosis:

If a cystic fibrosis patient does not respond to itraconazole capsules, consideration should be given to switching to alternative therapy. For more information concerning the use of itraconazole in cystic fibrosis patients see the prescribing information for itraconazole oral solution.







Hearing Loss:

Transient or permanent hearing loss has been reported in patients receiving treatment with itraconazole. Several of these reports included concurrent administration of quinidine which is contraindicated (See BOXED WARNING: Drug Interactions, CONTRAINDICATIONS: Drug Interactions and PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions). The hearing loss usually resolves when treatment is stopped, but can persist in some patients.







Information for Patients:


The topical effects of mucosal exposure may be different between the itraconazole capsules and oral solution. Only the oral solution has been demonstrated effective for oral and/or esophageal candidiasis. Itraconazole capsules should not be used interchangeably with itraconazole oral solution.
Instruct patients to take itraconazole capsules with a full meal. Itraconazole capsules must be swallowed whole.
Instruct patients about the signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure, and if these signs or symptoms occur during itraconazole administration, they should discontinue itraconazole and contact their healthcare provider immediately.
Instruct patients to stop itraconazole treatment immediately and contact their healthcare provider if any signs and symptoms suggestive of liver dysfunction develop. Such signs and symptoms may include unusual fatigue, anorexia, nausea and/or vomiting, jaundice, dark urine, or pale stools.
Instruct patients to contact their physician before taking any concomitant medications with itraconazole to ensure there are no potential drug interactions.
Instruct patients that hearing loss can occur with the use of itraconazole. The hearing loss usually resolves when treatment is stopped, but can persist in some patients. Advise patients to discontinue therapy and inform their physicians if any hearing loss symptoms occur.
Instruct patients that dizziness or blurred/double vision can sometimes occur with itraconazole. Advise patients that if they experience these events, they should not drive or use machines.








Drug Interactions:


Effect of Itraconazole Capsules on Other Drugs

Itraconazole and its major metabolite, hydroxy-itraconazole, are potent CYP3A4 inhibitors. Itraconazole is an inhibitor of the drug transporters P-glycoprotein and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP). Consequently, itraconazole has the potential to interact with many concomitant drugs resulting in either increased or sometimes decreased concentrations of the concomitant drugs. Increased concentrations may increase the risk of adverse reactions associated with the concomitant drug which can be severe or life-threatening in some cases (e.g., QT prolongation, Torsade de Pointes, respiratory depression, hepatic adverse reactions, hypersensitivity reactions, myelosuppression, hypotension, seizures, angioedema, atrial fibrillation, bradycardia, priapism). Reduced concentrations of concomitant drugs may reduce their efficacy. Table 1 lists examples of drugs that may have their concentrations affected by itraconazole, but it is not a comprehensive list.
Refer to the approved product labeling to become familiar with the interaction pathways, risk potential, and specific actions to be taken with regards to each concomitant drug prior to initiating therapy with itraconazole.
Although many of the clinical drug interactions in Table 1 are based on information with a similar azole antifungal, ketoconazole, these interactions are expected to occur with itraconazole.





Table 1: Drug Interactions with Itraconazole that Affect Concomitant Drug Concentrations




Examples of Concomitant Drugs Within Class 


 Prevention or Management 




Drug Interactions with Itraconazole that Increase Concomitant Drug Concentrations and May Increase Risk of Adverse Reactions Associated with the Concomitant Drug




 Alpha Blockers



Alfuzosin  Silodosin  Tamsulosin
Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.



 Analgesics 



Methadone
Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Fentanyl
Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Alfentanil  Buprenorphine (IV and sublingual)  Oxycodonea
 Sufentanil
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Antiarrhythmics 



Disopyramide  Dofetilide  Dronedarone  Quinidinea

Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Digoxina

Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Antibacterials 



Bedaquilineb

Concomitant itraconazole not recommended for more than 2 weeks at any time during bedaquiline treatment.


Rifabutin
Not recommended 2 weeks before, during, and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment. See also Table 2.


Clarithromycin
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary. See also Table 2.


Trimetrexate
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Anticoagulants and Antiplatelets 



Ticagrelor
Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Apixaban  Rivaroxaban  Vorapaxar
Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Cilostazol  Dabigatran  Warfarin
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Anticonvulsants 



Carbamazepine
Not recommended 2 weeks before, during, and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment. See also Table 2.



 Antidiabetic Drugs 



Repaglinidea
 Saxagliptin
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Antihelminthics, Antifungals and Antiprotozoals 



Isavuconazonium
Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Praziquantel
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.


Artemether-lumefantrine  Quininea

Monitor for adverse reactions.



 Antimigraine Drugs 



Ergot alkaloids (e.g., dihydroergotamine, ergotamine)
Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Eletriptan
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Antineoplastics 



Irinotecan
Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Venetoclax
Contraindicated during the dose initiation and ramp-up phase in patients with CLL/SLL.  Refer to the venetoclax prescribing information for dosing and safety monitoring instructions.


Mobocertiniba

Avoid use during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.



Axitinib  Bosutinib  Cabazitaxel  Cabozantinib  Ceritinib  Cobimetiniba
 Crizotinib  Dabrafenib  Dasatinib
Docetaxel


 Ibrutinib  Lapatinib  Nilotinib  Olapariba
 Pazopanib  Sunitinib  Trabectedin  Trastuzumab-  emtansine  Vinca alkaloids
Avoid use during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Entrectiniba
Pemigatiniba
Talazopariba

Refer to the entrectinib, pemigatinib and talazoparib prescribing information for dosing instructions if concomitant use cannot be avoided.


Glasdegib
Refer to the glasdegib prescribing information for safety monitoring if concomitant use cannot be avoided.


Bortezomib  Brentuximab-  vedotin  Busulfana
 Erlotinib  Gefitiniba
 Idelalisib  Imatinib  Ixabepilone

Nintedanib  Panobinostat  Ponatinib  Ruxolitinib  Sonidegib
Tretinoin (oral) Vandetaniba



Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary. For idelalisib, see also Table 2.



 Antipsychotics, Anxiolytics and Hypnotics 



Alprazolama
 Aripiprazolea
 Buspironea
 Cariprazine  Diazepama
 Haloperidola

Midazolam (IV)a
 Quetiapine  Ramelteon  Risperidonea
 Suvorexant
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.


Zopiclonea

Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.


Lurasidone  Midazolam (oral)a
 Pimozide  Triazolama

Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.



 Antivirals 



Daclatasvir  Indinavira
 Maraviroc
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary. For indinavir, see also Table 2.


Cobicistat  Elvitegravir (ritonavir-boosted)  Ombitasvir/Paritaprevir/Ritonavir with or without Dasabuvir  Ritonavir  Saquinavir (unboosted)a 

Monitor for adverse reactions. See also Table 2.


Elbasvir/grazoprevir  Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir  Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.  Monitor for adverse reactions.  Monitor for adverse reactions.



 Beta Blockers 



Nadolola

Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Calcium Channel Blockers 



Felodipinea
 Nisoldipine
Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Diltiazem  Other dihydropyridines  Verapamil
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary. For diltiazem, see also Table 2.



 Cardiovascular Drugs, Miscellaneous 



Ivabradine  Ranolazine
Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Aliskirena
 Riociguat  Sildenafil (for pulmonary hypertension)  Tadalafil (for pulmonary hypertension)
Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment. For sildenafil and tadalafil, see also Urologic Drugs below.


Bosentan  Guanfacine
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Contraceptives*



Dienogest  Ulipristal
Monitor for adverse reactions.



 Diuretics 




Eplerenone
Finerenone

Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.



 Gastrointestinal Drugs 



Cisapride  Naloxegol
Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Aprepitant  Loperamidea

Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.


Netupitant
Monitor for adverse reactions.



 Immunosuppressants 



Voclosporin
Contraindicated during and for 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Everolimus  Sirolimus  Temsirolimus (IV)
Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Budesonide (inhalation)a
 Budesonide (non-inhalation)  Ciclesonide (inhalation)  Cyclosporine (IV)a
 Cyclosporine (non-IV)  Dexamethasonea 

Fluticasone (inhalation)a
 Fluticasone (nasal)  Methylprednisolonea
 Tacrolimus (IV)a
 Tacrolimus (oral)
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Lipid-Lowering Drugs 



Lomitapide  Lovastatina
 Simvastatina

Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Atorvastatina

Monitor for drug adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Respiratory Drugs 



Salmeterol
Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.



 SSRIs, Tricyclics and Related Antidepressants 



Venlafaxine
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



 Urologic Drugs 



Avanafil
Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Fesoterodine


Patients with moderate to severe renal or hepatic impairment: Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Other patients: Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



Solifenacin


Patients with severe renal or moderate to severe hepatic impairment : Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Other patients: Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.



Darifenacin  Vardenafil
Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Dutasteride  Oxybutynina
 Sildenafil (for erectile dysfunction)  Tadalafil (for erectile dysfunction and benign prostatic hyperplasia)  Tolterodine
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary. For sildenafil and tadalafil, see also Cardiovascular Drugs above.



 Miscellaneous Drugs and Other Substances 



Colchicine

Patients with renal or hepatic impairment:  Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment. 
Other patients: Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Eliglustat

CYP2D6 EMsc taking a strong or moderate CYP2D6 inhibitor, CYP2D6 IMsc, or CYP2D6 PMsc
 : Contraindicated during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment. 
CYP2D6 EMsc not taking a strong or moderate CYP2D6 inhibitor: Monitor for adverse reactions. Eliglustat dose reduction may be necessary.


Lumacaftor/Ivacaftor
Not recommended 2 weeks before, during, and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.


Alitretinoin (oral)  Cabergoline  Cannabinoids  Galantamine  Cinacalcet  Ivacaftor
Monitor for adverse reactions. Concomitant drug dose reduction may be necessary.


Valbenazine

Concomitant drug dose reduction is necessary.
Refer to the valbenazine prescribing information for dosing instructions.




 Vasopressin Receptor Antagonists 



Conivaptan  Tolvaptan
Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.



 Drug Interactions with Itraconazole that Decrease Concomitant Drug Concentrations and May Reduce Efficacy of the Concomitant Drug 




 Antineoplastics 



Regorafenib
Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.



 Gastrointestinal Drugs 




Saccharomyces boulardii 

Not recommended during and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.



 Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 



Meloxicama

Concomitant drug dose increase may be necessary.



*CYP3A4 inhibitors (including itraconazole) may increase systemic contraceptive hormone concentrations.

aBased on clinical drug interaction information with itraconazole.

bBased on 400 mg bedaquiline once daily for 2 weeks.

cEMs: extensive metabolizers; IMs: intermediate metabolizers, PMs: poor metabolizers

Effect of Other Drugs on Itraconazole 

Itraconazole is mainly metabolized through CYP3A4. Other substances that either share this metabolic pathway or modify CYP3A4 activity may influence the pharmacokinetics of itraconazole. Some concomitant drugs have the potential to interact with itraconazole resulting in either increased or sometimes decreased concentrations of itraconazole. Increased concentrations may increase the risk of adverse reactions associated with itraconazole. Decreased concentrations may reduce itraconazole efficacy.
Table 2 lists examples of drugs that may affect itraconazole concentrations, but is not a comprehensive list. Refer to the approved product labeling to become familiar with the interaction pathways, risk potential and specific actions to be taken with regards to each concomitant drug prior to initiating therapy with itraconazole.
Although many of the clinical drug interactions in Table 2 are based on information with a similar azole antifungal, ketoconazole, these interactions are expected to occur with itraconazole.









 Table 2: Drug Interactions with Other Drugs that Affect Itraconazole Concentrations 




Examples of Concomitant Drugs Within Class 


 Prevention or Management 




Drug Interactions with Other Drugs that Increase Itraconazole Concentrations and May Increase Risk of Adverse Reactions Associated with Itraconazole




 Antibacterials 



Ciprofloxacina
 Erythromycina
 Clarithromycina 

Monitor for adverse reactions. Itraconazole dose reduction may be necessary.



 Antineoplastics 



Idelalisib
Monitor for adverse reactions. Itraconazole dose reduction may be necessary. See also Table 1.



 Antivirals 



Cobicistat  Darunavir (ritonavir-boosted)  Elvitegravir (ritonavir-boosted)  Fosamprenavir (ritonavir-boosted)  Indinavira
 Ombitasvir/ Paritaprevir/ Ritonavir with or without Dasabuvir  Ritonavir  Saquinavir
Monitor for adverse reactions. Itraconazole dose reduction may be necessary. For, cobicistat, elvitegravir, indinavir, ombitasvir/  paritaprevir/ ritonavir with or without  dasabuvir, ritonavir, and saquinavir, see also Table 1.



 Calcium Channel Blockers 



Diltiazem
Monitor for adverse reactions. Itraconazole dose reduction may be necessary. See also Table 1.



 Drug Interactions with Other Drugs that Decrease Itraconazole Concentrations and May Reduce Efficacy of Itraconazole 




 Antibacterials 



Isoniazid  Rifampicina

Not recommended 2 weeks before and during itraconazole treatment.


Rifabutina

Not recommended 2 weeks before, during, and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment. See also Table 1.



 Anticonvulsants 



Phenobarbital  Phenytoina 

Not recommended 2 weeks before and during itraconazole treatment.


Carbamazepine
Not recommended 2 weeks before, during, and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment. See also Table 1.



 Antivirals 



Efavirenza 
 Nevirapinea

Not recommended 2 weeks before and during itraconazole treatment.



 Gastrointestinal Drugs 



Drugs that reduce gastric acidity e.g. acid neutralizing medicines such as aluminum hydroxide, or acid secretion suppressors such as H2- receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors.
Use with caution. Administer acid neutralizing medicines at least 2 hours before or 2 hours after the intake of itraconazole capsules.



 Miscellaneous Drugs and Other Substances 



Lumacaftor/Ivacaftor
Not recommended 2 weeks before, during, and 2 weeks after itraconazole treatment.




a Based on clinical drug interaction information with itraconazole.

Pediatric Population 

Interaction studies have only been performed in adults.







Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, and Impairment of Fertility:

Itraconazole showed no evidence of carcinogenicity potential in mice treated orally for 23 months at dosage levels up to 80 mg/kg/day (approximately 1 time the maximum recommended human dose [MRHD] of 400 mg/day based on body surface area comparisons). Male rats treated with 25 mg/kg/day (0.6 times the MRHD based on body surface area comparisons) had a slightly increased incidence of soft tissue sarcoma. These sarcomas may have been a consequence of hypercholesterolemia, which is a response of rats, but not dogs or humans, to chronic itraconazole administration. Female rats treated with 50 mg/kg/day (1.2 times the MRHD based on body surface area comparisons) had an increased incidence of squamous cell carcinoma of the lung (2/50) as compared to the untreated group. Although the occurrence of squamous cell carcinoma in the lung is extremely uncommon in untreated rats, the increase in this study was not statistically significant.
Itraconazole produced no mutagenic effects when assayed in DNA repair test (unscheduled DNA synthesis) in primary rat hepatocytes, in Ames tests with Salmonella typhimurium (6 strains) and Escherichia coli, in the mouse lymphoma gene mutation tests, in a sex-linked recessive lethal mutation ( Drosophila melanogaster) test, in chromosome aberration tests in human lymphocytes, in a cell transformation test with C3H/10T½ C18 mouse embryo fibroblasts cells, in a dominant lethal mutation test in male and female mice, and in micronucleus tests in mice and rats.
Itraconazole did not affect the fertility of male or female rats treated orally with dosage levels of up to 40 mg/kg/day (1 time the MRHD based on body surface area comparisons), even though parental toxicity was present at this dosage level. More severe signs of parental toxicity, including death, were present in the next higher dosage level, 160 mg/kg/day (4 times the MRHD based on body surface area comparisons).







Pregnancy: Teratogenic Effects:

Itraconazole was found to cause a dose-related increase in maternal toxicity, embryotoxicity, and teratogenicity in rats at dosage levels of approximately 40 to 160 mg/kg/day (1 to 4 times the MRHD based on body surface area comparisons), and in mice at dosage levels of approximately 80 mg/kg/day (1 time the MRHD based on body surface area comparisons). Itraconazole has been shown to cross the placenta in a rat model. In rats, the teratogenicity consisted of major skeletal defects; in mice, it consisted of encephaloceles and/or macroglossia.
There are no studies in pregnant women. Itraconazole should be used for the treatment of systemic fungal infections in pregnancy only if the benefit outweighs the potential risk.
Itraconazole should not be administered for the treatment of onychomycosis to pregnant patients or to women contemplating pregnancy. Itraconazole should not be administered to women of childbearing potential for the treatment of onychomycosis unless they are using effective measures to prevent pregnancy and they begin therapy on the second or third day following the onset of menses. Highly effective contraception should be continued throughout itraconazole therapy and for 2 months following the end of treatment.
During post-marketing experience, cases of congenital abnormalities have been reported. (See ADVERSE REACTIONS: Post-marketing Experience.)







Nursing Mothers:

Itraconazole is excreted in human milk; therefore, the expected benefits of itraconazole therapy for the mother should be weighed against the potential risk from exposure of itraconazole to the infant. The U.S. Public Health Service Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advises HIV-infected women not to breast-feed to avoid potential transmission of HIV to uninfected infants.







Pediatric Use:

The efficacy and safety of itraconazole have not been established in pediatric patients.
The long-term effects of itraconazole on bone growth in children are unknown. In three toxicology studies using rats, itraconazole induced bone defects at dosage levels as low as 20 mg/kg/day (0.5 times the MRHD of 400 mg based on body surface area comparisons). The induced defects included reduced bone plate activity, thinning of the zona compacta of the large bones, and increased bone fragility. At a dosage level of 80 mg/kg/day (2 times the MRHD based on body surface area comparisons) over 1 year or 160 mg/kg/day (4 times the MRHD based on body surface area comparisons) for 6 months, itraconazole induced small tooth pulp with hypocellular appearance in some rats.







Geriatric Use:

Clinical studies of itraconazole capsules did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 years and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects. It is advised to use itraconazole capsules in these patients only if it is determined that the potential benefit outweighs the potential risks. In general, it is recommended that the dose selection for an elderly patient should be taken into consideration, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function, and of concomitant disease or other drug therapy.
Transient or permanent hearing loss has been reported in elderly patients receiving treatment with itraconazole. Several of these reports included concurrent administration of quinidine which is contraindicated (See BOXED WARNING: Drug Interactions, CONTRAINDICATIONS: Drug Interactions and PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions).







HIV-Infected Patients:

Because hypochlorhydria has been reported in HIV-infected individuals, the absorption of itraconazole in these patients may be decreased.







Renal Impairment:

Limited data are available on the use of oral itraconazole in patients with renal impairment. The exposure of itraconazole may be lower in some patients with renal impairment. Caution should be exercised when itraconazole is administered in this patient population and dose adjustment may be needed. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Special Populations and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)







Hepatic Impairment:

Limited data are available on the use of oral itraconazole in patients with hepatic impairment. Caution should be exercised when this drug is administered in this patient population. It is recommended that patients with impaired hepatic function be carefully monitored when taking itraconazole. It is recommended that the prolonged elimination half-life of itraconazole observed in the single oral dose clinical trial with itraconazole capsules in cirrhotic patients be considered when deciding to initiate therapy with other medications metabolized by CYP3A4.
In patients with elevated or abnormal liver enzymes or active liver disease, or who have experienced liver toxicity with other drugs, treatment with itraconazole is strongly discouraged unless there is a serious or life-threatening situation where the expected benefit exceeds the risk. It is recommended that liver function monitoring be done in patients with pre-existing hepatic function abnormalities or those who have experienced liver toxicity with other medications. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Special Populations and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)
OVERDOSAGE

Itraconazole is not removed by dialysis. In the event of accidental overdosage, supportive measures should be employed. Contact a certified poison control center for the most up to date information on the management of itraconazole capsules overdosage (1-800-222-1222 or www.poison.org).
In general, adverse events reported with overdose have been consistent with adverse drug reactions already listed in this package insert for itraconazole. (See ADVERSE REACTIONS.)