6 ADVERSE REACTIONS

The following clinically significant adverse reactions are described elsewhere in the labeling:

Ocular Hyperemia [see Contraindications (4.1)]

Corneal Hypoesthesia [see Contraindications (4.2)]

Corneal Infections [see Contraindications (4.3)]

Corneal Ulcers [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]

Contact Lens-Related Complications [see Warning and Precautions (5.2)]

Chemical Exposure [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)]

Acanthamoeba Keratitis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]







The most commonly observed adverse reactions in clinical studies, occurring in ≥ 1% of ACUVUE® Theravision™ with Ketotifen treated eyes, were eye irritation, eye pain, and instillation site pain. (6.1)


To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Johnson & Johnson Vision Care, Inc. at 1-800-843-2020 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.








6.1 Clinical Trials Experience

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a product cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another product and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.
The most commonly observed adverse reactions in clinical studies, occurring in ≥1% of ACUVUE® Theravision™ with Ketotifen treated eyes, were eye irritation, eye pain, and instillation site irritation.
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS





Corneal Ulcer: Remove lenses (5.1) 
Contact Lens Related Complications: Remove lenses (5.2)
Chemical Exposures: Flush eyes with water (5.3)
Acanthamoeba Keratitis: Do not wear while swimming (5.4)








5.1	Corneal Ulcers

ACUVUE Theravision with Ketotifen should not be inserted if the patient has corneal epithelial breakdown, corneal ulceration, dry eye disease, injury or abnormality that affects the eyelids or anterior segment of the eye.  Contact lens wear may worsen these conditions and lead to sight threatening complications.  If a patient experiences eye discomfort, excessive tearing, vision changes, or redness of the eye, the patient should be instructed to immediately remove the lenses, and promptly contact the Eye Care Professional.
Studies have shown that when daily wear users wear their lenses overnight, the risk of ulcerative keratitis is greater than among those who do not wear them overnight. Contact lens wearers who are smokers have a higher incidence of corneal ulcers than nonsmokers.








5.2	Contact Lens-Related Complications

ACUVUE Theravision with Ketotifen should not be used to treat or prevent lens-related symptoms including irritation, discomfort or redness.  ACUVUE Theravision with Ketotifen insertion could result in serious injury if a patient is experiencing these symptoms. Patients should be cautioned that proper use and care of contact lenses and lens care products are essential for the safe use of these products. If patients experience symptoms of contact lens intolerance or keratitis, the lens(es) should be IMMEDIATELY REMOVED.








5.3 	Chemical Exposures

If chemicals of any kind (household products, gardening solutions, laboratory chemicals, etc.) are splashed into the eyes, the patient should: FLUSH EYES IMMEDIATELY WITH  WATER AND IMMEDIATELY CONTACT THE EYE CARE PROFESSIONAL OR VISIT A HOSPITAL EMERGENCY ROOM WITHOUT DELAY.








5.4	Acanthamoeba Keratitis

ACUVUE Theravision with Ketotifen should not be worn while swimming or in hot tubs.  The  lens should not be rinsed in water from the tap. Tap water contains many impurities that can contaminate or damage the lenses and may lead to eye infection or injury.  Contact lens wear in these settings increases the risk of sight threatening eye infections from microorganisms.








5.5 	Backup Spectacles

Eye Care Professionals should instruct the patient to always have a functional pair of spectacles with a current prescription available to use if the patient becomes unable to wear contact lenses, or in circumstances where contact lens wear is not advised.








5.6 	Eye Protection

Patients should be advised to notify the employer of being a contact lens wearer. Some jobs may require the use of eye protection equipment or may require that the patient not wear contact lenses.








5.7 	Concomitant Use of Eye Drops or Eye Medications

Eye Drops or Eye Medications containing benzalkonium chloride should not be used simultaneously with ACUVUE® Theravision™ with Ketotifen. Wait at least 10 minutes after eye drop application before inserting lenses.
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS





8.1 Pregnancy







Risk Summary

There are no adequate and well-controlled studies of ACUVUE® Theravison™ with Ketotifen administration in pregnant women to inform a drug-associated risk. ACUVUE® Theravison™ with Ketotifen is not absorbed systemically following ocular administration, and maternal use is not expected to result in fetal exposure to the drug. Oral administration of ketotifen fumarate to pregnant rats or rabbits did not produce teratogenicity at clinically relevant doses [see Data].










Data









Human Data

There are no human data that establish the presence or absence of drug-associated risk with the use of ACUVUE® Theravision™ with Ketotifen by pregnant women.










Animal Data

Oral administration of 45 mg/kg/day ketotifen to pregnant rabbits resulted in an increased incidence of retarded ossification of the sternebrae. This dose (normalized to body surface area) was approximately 23,000 times higher than the daily maximum recommended human ophthalmic dose (MRHOD) of 0.038 mg.
No adverse embryofetal effects were observed in rats or rabbits orally administered 100 mg/kg/day and 15 mg/kg/day, respectively, during organogenesis.  These doses (normalized to body surface area) were approximately 26,000 and 7,700 times higher than the MRHOD, respectively.
An oral dose of 50 mg/kg/day ketotifen (approximately 13,000 times higher than MRHOD) administered to rats from Day 15 of pregnancy until Day 21 postpartum produced maternal toxicity, a slight increase in postnatal mortality and a slight decrease in body weight gain in offspring during the first four days post-partum.












8.2 Lactation







Risk Summary

There is no information regarding the presence or absence of ketotifen fumarate or its metabolites in human milk following use of ACUVUE® Theravision™ with Ketotifen, or on the breastfed infants and milk production.  Ketotifen fumarate has been identified in breast milk in rats following oral administration. It is not known whether topical ocular administration could result in sufficient systemic absorption to produce detectable quantities in breast milk.
The development and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother's clinical need for ACUVUE® Theravision™ with Ketotifen and any potential adverse effects on the breast-fed child from ketotifen fumarate.










8.3 Pediatric Use

The safety and efficacy of ACUVUE® Theravision™ with Ketotifen in pediatric patients below the age of 11 years has not been established.








8.4 Geriatric Use

Clinical studies of etafilcon A with ketotifen did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects.