ADVERSE REACTIONS

During clinical trials 45 (5.0%) of 905 patients treated with Ketoconazole Cream 2% and 5 (2.4%) of 208 patients treated with placebo reported side effects consisting mainly of severe irritation, pruritus and stinging. One of the patients treated with Ketoconazole Cream developed a painful allergic reaction.
In worldwide postmarketing experience, rare reports of contact dermatitis have been associated with Ketoconazole Cream or one of its excipients, namely sodium sulfite or propylene glycol.
WARNINGS

Ketoconazole Cream 2% is not for ophthalmic use.
Ketoconazole Cream 2% contains sodium sulfite anhydrous, a sulfite that may cause allergic-type reactions including anaphylactic symptoms and life-threatening or less severe asthmatic episodes in certain susceptible people. The overall prevalence of sulfite sensitivity in the general population is unknown and probably low. Sulfite sensitivity is seen more frequently in asthmatic than in nonasthmatic people.
PRECAUTIONS







General:If a reaction suggesting sensitivity or chemical irritation should occur, use of the medication should be discontinued. Hepatitis (1:10,000 reported incidence) and, at high doses, lowered testosterone and ACTH induced corticosteroid serum levels have been seen with orally administered ketoconazole; these effects have not been seen with topical ketoconazole.

 










Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility:A long-term feeding study in Swiss Albino mice and in Wistar rats showed no evidence of oncogenic activity. The dominant lethal mutation test in male and female mice revealed that single oral doses of ketoconazole as high as 80 mg/kg produced no mutation in any stage of germ cell development. The Ames'
 
  Salmonellamicrosomal activator assay was also negative.

 








Pregnancy: Teratogenic effects: Pregnancy Category C:

Ketoconazole has been shown to be teratogenic (syndactylia and oligodactylia) in the rat when given orally in the diet at 80 mg/kg/day, (10 times the maximum recommended human oral dose). However, these effects may be related to maternal toxicity, which was seen at this and higher dose levels.
There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Ketoconazole should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus.










Nursing Mothers:It is not known whether Ketoconazole Cream 2% administered topically could result in sufficient systemic absorption to produce detectable quantities in breast milk. Nevertheless, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.

 










Pediatric Use:Safety and effectiveness in children have not been established.