6 ADVERSE REACTIONS




    Common adverse reactions (events 2% greater than placebo) by use:

Hypertension: headache, dizziness and cough 
          
  
     (6.1)

Heart Failure: hypotension and chest pain 
          
  
     (6.1)

Acute Myocardial Infarction: hypotension 
          
  
     (6.1)



To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Solco Healthcare US, LLC at 1-866-257-2597 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or  www.fda.gov/medwatch.








6.1 Clinical Trials Experience

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical studies of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical studies of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.

Hypertension

In clinical trials in patients with hypertension treated with lisinopril, 5.7% of patients on lisinopril discontinued with adverse reactions.
The following adverse reactions (events 2% greater on lisinopril than on placebo) were observed with lisinopril alone: headache (by 3.8%), dizziness (by 3.5%), cough (by 2.5%).

Heart Failure

In patients with systolic heart failure treated with lisinopril for up to four years, 11% discontinued therapy with adverse reactions. In controlled studies in patients with heart failure, therapy was discontinued in 8.1% of patients treated with lisinopril for 12 weeks, compared to 7.7% of patients treated with placebo for 12 weeks.
The following adverse reactions (events 2% greater on lisinopril than on placebo) were observed with lisinopril: hypotension (by 3.8%), chest pain (by 2.1%).
In the two-dose ATLAS trial 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Clinical Studies (14.2)] 
         
 
  in heart failure patients, withdrawals due to adverse reactions were not different between the low and high groups, either in total number of discontinuation (17-18%) or in rare specific reactions (< 1%). The following adverse reactions, mostly related to ACE inhibition, were reported more commonly in the high dose group:
        

 

Table 1 Dose-related Adverse Drug Reactions: ATLAS trial







High Dose
             
     
      (n=1568)
            
    
     


Low Dose
             
     
      (n=1596)
            
    
     




 Dizziness


19%


12%




 Hypotension


11%


7%




 Creatinine increased


10%


7%




 Hyperkalemia


6%


4%




 Syncope


7%


5%





Acute Myocardial Infarction

Patients treated with lisinopril had a higher incidence of hypotension (by 5.3%) and renal dysfunction (by 1.3%) compared with patients not taking lisinopril.
Other clinical adverse reactions occurring in 1 % or higher of patients with hypertension or heart failure treated with lisinopril in controlled clinical trials and do not appear in other sections of labeling are listed below:

Body as a whole: Fatigue, asthenia, orthostatic effects.
        

 

Digestive: Pancreatitis, constipation, flatulence, dry mouth, diarrhea.
        

 

Hematologic: Rare cases of bone marrow depression, hemolytic anemia, leukopenia/neutropenia and thrombocytopenia.
        

 

Endocrine: Diabetes mellitus, inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion.
        

 

Metabolic: Gout.
        

 

Skin: Urticaria, alopecia, photosensitivity, erythema, flushing, diaphoresis, cutaneous pseudolymphoma, toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and pruritus.
        

 

Special Senses: Visual loss, diplopia, blurred vision, tinnitus, photophobia, taste disturbances, olfactory disturbance.
        

 

Urogenital: Impotence.
        

 

Miscellaneous: A symptom complex has been reported which may include a positive ANA, an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, arthralgia/arthritis, myalgia, fever, vasculitis, eosinophilia, leukocytosis, paresthesia and vertigo. Rash, photosensitivity or other dermatological manifestations may occur alone or in combination with these symptoms.
        

 

Clinical Laboratory Test Findings


Serum Potassium: In clinical trials hyperkalemia (serum potassium greater than 5.7 mEq/L) occurred in 2.2% and 4.8% of lisinopril-treated patients with hypertension and heart failure, respectively 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.5)]. 
         
 
  


Creatinine, Blood Urea Nitrogen: Minor increases in blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine, reversible upon discontinuation of therapy, were observed in about 2% of patients with hypertension treated with lisinopril alone. Increases were more common in patients receiving concomitant diuretics and in patients with renal artery stenosis 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]
         
 
  . Reversible minor increases in blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine were observed in 11.6% of patients with heart failure on concomitant diuretic therapy. Frequently, these abnormalities resolved when the dosage of the diuretic was decreased.
        

 
Patients with acute myocardial infarction in the GISSI-3 trial treated with lisinopril had a higher (2.4% versus 1.1% in placebo) incidence of renal dysfunction in-hospital and at six weeks (increasing creatinine concentration to over 3 mg/dL or a doubling or more of the baseline serum creatinine concentration).

Hemoglobin and Hematocrit: Small decreases in hemoglobin and hematocrit (mean decreases of approximately 0.4 g% and 1.3 vol%, respectively) occurred frequently in patients treated with lisinopril but were rarely of clinical importance in patients without some other cause of anemia. In clinical trials, less than 0.1% of patients discontinued therapy due to anemia.
        

 








6.2 Post-marketing Experience

The following adverse reactions have been identified during post-approval use of Lisinopril that are not included in other sections of labeling. Because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure.
Other reactions include:

Metabolism and nutrition disorders

Hyponatremia 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]
         
 
  , cases of hypoglycemia in diabetic patients on oral antidiabetic agents or insulin 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Drug Interactions (7.2)]
         
 
  


Nervous system and psychiatric disorders

Mood alterations (including depressive symptoms), mental confusion, hallucinations

Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders

Psoriasis
WARNING: FETAL TOXICITY


When pregnancy is detected, discontinue lisinopril as soon as possible 
        
  
   [see 
         
   
    Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]. 
        
  
   

Drugs that act directly on the renin-angiotensin system can cause injury and death to the developing fetus 
        
  
   [see 
         
   
    Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]. 
        
  
   







WARNING: FETAL TOXICITY


See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning.




When pregnancy is detected, discontinue lisinopril as soon as possible. 
           
   
      (5.1)



Drugs that act directly on the renin-angiotensin system can cause injury and death to the developing fetus. 
           
   
      (5.1)
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS





Angioedema: Discontinue lisinopril, provide appropriate therapy and monitor until resolved 
          
  
     (5.2)

Renal impairment: Monitor renal function periodically 
          
  
     (5.3)

Hypotension: Patients with other heart or renal diseases have increased risk, monitor blood pressure after initiation 
          
  
     (5.4)

Hyperkalemia: Monitor serum potassium periodically 
          
  
     (5.5)

Cholestatic jaundice and hepatic failure: Monitor for jaundice or signs of liver failure 
          
  
     (5.6)









5.1 Fetal Toxicity

Lisinopril can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. Use of drugs that act on the renin-angiotensin system during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy reduces fetal renal function and increases fetal and neonatal morbidity and death. Resulting oligohydramnios can be associated with fetal lung hypoplasia and skeletal deformations. Potential neonatal adverse effects include skull hypoplasia, anuria, hypotension, renal failure, and death. When pregnancy is detected, discontinue lisinopril as soon as possible 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Use in specific Populations (8.1)].
         
 
  









5.2 Angioedema and Anaphylactoid Reactions

Patients taking concomitant mTOR inhibitor (e.g. temsirolimus, sirolimus, everolimus) therapy or a neprilysin inhibitor may be at increased risk for angioedema. 
         
 
  [see 

Drug Interactions (7.7, 7.8)

].
        

 

Angioedema



Head and Neck Angioedema


Angioedema of the face, extremities, lips, tongue, glottis and/or larynx, including some fatal reactions, have occurred in patients treated with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, including lisinopril, at any time during treatment. Patients with involvement of the tongue, glottis or larynx are likely to experience airway obstruction, especially those with a history of airway surgery. Lisinopril should be promptly discontinued and appropriate therapy and monitoring should be provided until complete and sustained resolution of signs and symptoms of angioedema has occurred.
Patients with a history of angioedema unrelated to ACE inhibitor therapy may be at increased risk of angioedema while receiving an ACE inhibitor 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Contraindications (4)]. 
         
 
  ACE inhibitors have been associated with a higher rate of angioedema in black than in non-black patients.
        

 


Intestinal Angioedema


Intestinal angioedema has occurred in patients treated with ACE inhibitors. These patients presented with abdominal pain (with or without nausea or vomiting); in some cases there was no prior history of facial angioedema and C-1 esterase levels were normal. In some cases, the angioedema was diagnosed by procedures including abdominal CT scan or ultrasound, or at surgery, and symptoms resolved after stopping the ACE inhibitor.

Anaphylactoid Reactions



Anaphylactoid Reactions During Desensitization


Two patients undergoing desensitizing treatment with hymenoptera venom while receiving ACE inhibitors sustained life- threatening anaphylactoid reactions.


Anaphylactoid Reactions During Dialysis


Sudden and potentially life threatening anaphylactoid reactions have occurred in some patients dialyzed with high-flux membranes and treated concomitantly with an ACE inhibitor. In such patients, dialysis must be stopped immediately, and aggressive therapy for anaphylactoid reactions must be initiated. Symptoms have not been relieved by antihistamines in these situations. In these patients, consideration should be given to using a different type of dialysis membrane or a different class of antihypertensive agent. Anaphylactoid reactions have also been reported in patients undergoing low-density lipoprotein apheresis with dextran sulfate absorption.








5.3 Impaired Renal Function

Monitor renal function periodically in patients treated with lisinopril. Changes in renal function including acute renal failure can be caused by drugs that inhibit the renin-angiotensin system. Patients whose renal function may depend in part on the activity of the renin-angiotensin system (e.g., patients with renal artery stenosis, chronic kidney disease, severe congestive heart failure, post-myocardial infarction or volume depletion) may be at particular risk of developing acute renal failure on lisinopril. Consider withholding or discontinuing therapy in patients who develop a clinically significant decrease in renal function on lisinopril 
         
 
   [see 
          
  
   Adverse Reactions (6.1), 
          
  
   Drug Interactions (7.4)]
         
 
  .
        

 








5.4 Hypotension

Lisinopril can cause symptomatic hypotension, sometimes complicated by oliguria, progressive azotemia, acute renal failure or death. Patients at risk of excessive hypotension include those with the following conditions or characteristics: heart failure with systolic blood pressure below 100 mmHg, ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, hyponatremia, high dose diuretic therapy, renal dialysis, or severe volume and/or salt depletion of any etiology.
In these patients, lisinopril should be started under very close medical supervision and such patients should be followed closely for the first two weeks of treatment and whenever the dose of lisinopril and/or diuretic is increased. Avoid use of lisinopril in patients who are hemodynamically unstable after acute MI.
Symptomatic hypotension is also possible in patients with severe aortic stenosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Surgery/Anesthesia

In patients undergoing major surgery or during anesthesia with agents that produce hypotension, lisinopril may block angiotensin II formation secondary to compensatory renin release. If hypotension occurs and is considered to be due to this mechanism, it can be corrected by volume expansion.








5.5 Hyperkalemia

Serum potassium should be monitored periodically in patients receiving lisinopril. Drugs that inhibit the renin angiotensin system can cause hyperkalemia. Risk factors for the development of hyperkalemia include renal insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, and the concomitant use of potassium-sparing diuretics, potassium supplements and/or potassium-containing salt substitutes 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Drug Interactions (7.1)].
         
 
  









5.6 Hepatic Failure

ACE inhibitors have been associated with a syndrome that starts with cholestatic jaundice or hepatitis and progresses to fulminant hepatic necrosis and sometimes death. The mechanism of this syndrome is not understood. Patients receiving ACE inhibitors who develop jaundice or marked elevations of hepatic enzymes should discontinue the ACE inhibitor and receive appropriate medical treatment.
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS





Lactation: Advise not to breastfeed. (
          
  
     8.2)
         
 
    
Race: Less antihypertensive effect in blacks than non blacks 
          
  
     (8.6)









8.1 Pregnancy

Risk Summary
Lisinopril can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. Use of drugs that act on the renin-angiotensin system during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy reduces fetal renal function and increases fetal and neonatal morbidity and death. Most epidemiologic studies examining fetal abnormalities after exposure to antihypertensive use in the first trimester have not distinguished drugs affecting the renin-angiotensin system from other antihypertensive agents. When pregnancy is detected, discontinue lisinopril as soon as possible.
The estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population(s) are unknown. In the general U.S. population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2% to 4% and 15% to 20%, respectively.
Clinical Considerations

Disease-associated maternal and/or embryo/fetal risk

Hypertension in pregnancy increases the maternal risk for pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes, premature delivery, and delivery complications (e.g., need for cesarean section, and post-partum hemorrhage). Hypertension increases the fetal risk for intrauterine growth restriction and intrauterine death. Pregnant women with hypertension should be carefully monitored and managed accordingly.

Fetal/Neonatal Adverse Reactions

Oligohydramnios in pregnant women who use drugs affecting the renin-angiotensin system in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy can result in the following: reduced fetal renal function leading to anuria and renal failure, fetal lung hypoplasia and skeletal deformations, including skull hypoplasia, hypotension, and death. In the unusual case that there is no appropriate alternative to therapy with drugs affecting the renin-angiotensin system for a particular patient, apprise the mother of the potential risk to the fetus.
Perform serial ultrasound examinations to assess the intra-amniotic environment. Fetal testing may be appropriate, based on the week of pregnancy. Patients and physicians should be aware, however, that oligohydramnios may not appear until after the fetus has sustained irreversible injury. Closely observe infants with histories of in utero exposure to lisinopril for hypotension, oliguria, and hyperkalemia. If oliguria or hypotension occur in neonates with a history of in utero exposure to lisinopril, support blood pressure and renal perfusion. Exchange transfusions or dialysis may be required as a means of reversing hypotension and substituting for disordered renal function.








8.2 Lactation

Risk Summary
No data are available regarding the presence of lisinopril in human milk or the effects of lisinopril on the breast fed infant or on milk production. Lisinopril is present in rat milk. Because of the potential for severe adverse reactions in the breastfed infant, advise women not to breastfeed during treatment with lisinopril.








8.3 Nursing Mothers

Milk of lactating rats contains radioactivity following administration of 
         
 
  14C lisinopril. It is not known whether this drug is excreted in human milk. Because many drugs are excreted in human milk and because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants from ACE inhibitors, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or discontinue Lisinopril, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.
        

 








8.4 Pediatric Use

Antihypertensive effects and safety of lisinopril have been established in pediatric patients aged 6 to 16 years 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Dosage and Administration (2.1) and 
          
  
   Clinical Studies (14.1)]
         
 
  . No relevant differences between the adverse reaction profile for pediatric patients and adult patients were identified.
        

 
Safety and effectiveness of lisinopril have not been established in pediatric patients under the age 6 or in pediatric patients with glomerular filtration rate < 30 mL/min/1.73 m
         
 
  2 
[see 
          
  
   Dosage and Administration (2.1), 
          
  
   Clinical Pharmacology (12.3), and 
          
  
   Clinical Studies (14.1)].
         
 
  


Neonates with a history of in utero exposure to lisinopril

If oliguria or hypotension occurs, direct attention toward support of blood pressure and renal perfusion. Exchange transfusions or dialysis may be required as a means of reversing hypotension and/or substituting for disordered renal function.








8.5 Geriatric Use

No dosage adjustment with lisinopril is necessary in elderly patients. In a clinical study of lisinopril in patients with myocardial infarctions (GISSI-3 Trial) 4,413 (47%) were 65 and over, while 1,656 (18%) were 75 and over. In this study, 4.8 % of patients aged 75 years and older discontinued lisinopril treatment because of renal dysfunction vs. 1.3% of patients younger than 75 years. No other differences in safety or effectiveness were observed between elderly and younger patients, but greater sensitivity of some older individuals cannot be ruled out.








8.6 Race

ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, have an effect on blood pressure that is less in black patients than in non blacks.








8.7 Renal Impairment

Dose adjustment of lisinopril is required in patients undergoing hemodialysis or whose creatinine clearance is ≤ 30 mL/min. No dose adjustment of lisinopril is required in patients with creatinine clearance > 30 mL/min 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Dosage and Administration (2.4) and 
          
  
   Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
         
 
  .
10 OVERDOSAGE

Following a single oral dose of 20 g/kg no lethality occurred in rats, and death occurred in one of 20 mice receiving the same dose. The most likely manifestation of overdosage would be hypotension, for which the usual treatment would be intravenous infusion of normal saline solution.
Lisinopril can be removed by hemodialysis 
       
 
  [see 
        
  
   Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].