6 ADVERSE REACTIONS




The most common adverse reactions include bradycardia and nausea and vomiting. (
         
 
    6)
        

   


To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact 
Fresenius Kabi USA, LLC at 
1-800-551-7176 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or 
          
  
     www.fda.gov/medwatch .
         
 
    








6.1 Clinical Trial Experience

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.  
The following serious adverse reactions are described below and elsewhere in the labeling:

Bradycardia [
          
  
   see Warnings and Precautions (
           
   
    5.1)
          
  
   ]
          
  
   

Cardiovascular Complications 
          
  
    [
          
  
   see Warnings and Precautions (
           
   
    5.2)
          
  
   ]
          
  
   

Hypersensitivity (Anaphylaxis) [
          
  
   see Warnings and Precautions (
           
   
    5.3)
          
  
   ]
          
  
   


Adverse reactions to neostigmine methylsulfate are most often attributable to exaggerated pharmacological effects, in particular, at muscarinic receptor sites.  The use of an anticholinergic agent, e.g., atropine sulfate or glycopyrrolate, may prevent or mitigate these reactions.  
Quantitative adverse event data are available from trials of neostigmine methylsulfate in which 200 adult patients were exposed to the product.  Adverse reactions that occurred with an overall frequency of 1% or greater included the following:  

Allergic: Allergic reactions and anaphylaxis.
        

 

Neurological: Dizziness, syncope, weakness, convulsions, loss of consciousness, drowsiness, headache, dysarthria, miosis and visual changes.
         
 
  


Cardiovascular: Cardiac arrhythmias including bradycardia, tachycardia, atrioventricular block and nodal rhythm, as well as cardiac arrest, and hypotension.
         
 
  


Respiratory: Increased oral, pharyngeal and bronchial secretions, dyspnea, respiratory depression, oxygen desaturation, respiratory arrest and bronchospasm.
         
 
  


Dermatologic: Diaphoresis, flushing,
         
 
    rash, pruritus, and urticaria.
         
 
  


Gastrointestinal: Dry mouth,
         
 
    nausea, emesis, flatulence and increased peristalsis.
         
 
  


Genitourinary: Increased urinary frequency.
         
 
  


Musculoskeletal: Muscle cramps and spasm, arthralgia.
        

 

Psychiatric: Insomnia
        

 

General:  Incision site complication, pharyngolaryngeal pain, procedural complication, procedural pain
        

 








6.2 Post-Marketing Experience

The following adverse reactions have been identified during parenteral use of neostigmine methylsulfate.  Because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure. 

Allergic Disorders: Allergic reactions, anaphylaxis
        

 

Nervous System Disorders: Convulsions, drowsiness, dysarthria, fasciculation, loss of consciousness, miosis, visual changes
        

 

Cardiovascular Disorders: Cardiac arrest, cardiac arrhythmias (A-V block, nodal rhythm), hypotension, nonspecific EKG changes, syncope
        

 

Respiratory, Thoracic and Mediastinal Disorders: Bronchospasm; increased oral, pharyngeal and bronchial secretions; respiratory arrest; respiratory depression
        

 

Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue Disorders: Rash, urticaria diaphoresis, flushing
        

 

Gastrointestinal Disorders: Bowel cramps, diarrhea, flatulence, increased peristalsis
        

 

Renal and Urinary Disorders: Urinary frequency
        

 

Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue Disorders: Arthralgia, muscle cramps, spasms, weakness
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS






Bradycardia:  Atropine or glycopyrrolate should be administered prior to administration of neostigmine methylsulfate injection to lessen risk of bradycardia (
          
  
     5.1) 
         
 
    

Coexisting Conditions: patients with known cardiac disease, cardiac arrhythmias, or recent coronary artery occlusion may be particularly sensitive to the hemodynamic effects of neostigmine; their blood pressure and electrocardiogram should be continuously monitored with the initiation of neostigmine treatment and for a duration sufficient to assure hemodynamic stability. (
          
  
     5.2)
         
 
    

Neuromuscular Dysfunction:  Can occur if large doses of neostigmine methylsulfate are administered when there is minimal neuromuscular blockade; reduce the dose if recovery from neuromuscular blockade is nearly complete. (
          
  
     5.4)
         
 
    








5.1 Bradycardia

Neostigmine has been associated with bradycardia.  An anticholinergic agent, (e.g., atropine sulfate or glycopyrrolate) should be administered prior to Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection administration to lessen the risk of bradycardia [
         
 
  see Dosage and Administration (
          
  
   2.4)
         
 
  ].  
        

 








5.2 Cardiovascular Complications

Cardiac arrhythmias, nonspecific electrocardiogram changes, cardiac arrest, syncope and hypotension have been reported with neostigmine methylsulfate.  In patients with certain cardiovascular conditions such as coronary artery disease, cardiac arrhythmias or recent acute coronary syndrome, the risk of blood pressure and heart rate complications may be increased.  Risk of these complications may also be increased in patients with myasthenia gravis.  Standard antagonism with anticholinergics (e.g., atropine) is generally successful to mitigate the risk of cardiovascular complications. 








5.3 Hypersensitivity (Anaphylaxis)

Hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis have been reported with neostigmine.  Ensure that appropriate medical support measures, including atropine, cardiopulmonary resuscitation equipment, and medications to treat anaphylaxis are readily available. 








5.4 Neuromuscular Dysfunction

Neuromuscular dysfunction has been associated with administration of large doses of neostigmine when neuromuscular blockade is minimal.  To mitigate the risk of neuromuscular dysfunction, consider reducing the dose of neostigmine if recovery from neuromuscular blockade is nearly complete.








5.5 Cholinergic Crisis

Overdosage of neostigmine may cause cholinesterase inhibitor toxicity or cholinergic crisis which may be difficult to differentiate from myasthenia crisis since both conditions present with similar symptoms.  Both conditions result in extreme muscle weakness but require radically different treatments.  Cholinergic crisis requires immediate withdrawal of all anticholinergic medication and immediate use of atropine [
         
 
  see Overdosage (
          
  
   10)
         
 
  ].
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS




Pregnancy: No human data and limited animal exist.  Use only if clearly needed.







8.1 Pregnancy-


Risk Summary

There are no adequate or well-controlled studies of Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection in pregnant women.  It is not known whether Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman or can affect reproductive capacity.  The incidence of malformations in human pregnancies has not been established for neostigmine as the data are limited.  All pregnancies, regardless of drug exposure, have a background risk of 2 to 4% for major birth defects, and 15 to 20% for pregnancy loss.   
No adverse effects were noted in rats or rabbits treated with human equivalent doses of neostigmine methylsulfate doses up to 8.1 and 13 mcg/kg/day, respectively, during organogenesis (0.1 to 0.2-times the maximum recommended human dose of 5 mg/60 kg person/day based on body surface area comparisons).   
Anticholinesterase drugs, including neostigmine may cause uterine irritability and induce premature labor when administered to pregnant women near term.
Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection should be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed.


Data


Animal Data

In embryofetal development studies, rats and rabbits were administered neostigmine methylsulfate at human equivalent doses (HED, on a mg/m
         
 
  2 basis) of 1.6, 4 and 8.1 mcg/kg/day 3.2, 8.1, and 
        

 
13 mcg/kg/day, respectively, during the period of organogenesis (Gestation Days 6 through 17 for rats and Gestation Days 6 through 18 for rabbits).  There was no evidence for a teratogenic effect in rats and rabbits up to HED 8.1 and 13 mcg/kg/day, which are approximately 0.097-times and 0.16-times the MRHD of 5 mg/60 kg, respectively in the presence of minimal maternal toxicity (tremors, ataxia, and prostration).  The studies resulted in exposures in the animals well below predicted exposures in humans. 
In a pre- and postnatal development study in rats, neostigmine methylsulfate was administered to pregnant female rats at human equivalent doses (HED) of 1.6, 4 and 8.1 mcg/kg/day from Day 6 of gestation through Day 20 of lactation, with weaning on Day 21.  There were no adverse effects on physical development, behavior, learning ability, or fertility in the offspring occurred at HED doses up 8.1 mcg/kg/day which is 0.097-times the MRHD of 5 mg/60 kg on a mg/m
         
 
  2 basis in the presence of minimal maternal toxicity (tremors, ataxia, and prostration).  The studies resulted in exposures in the animals well below predicted exposures in humans.  
        

 








8.2 Lactation

It is not known whether Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection 
         
 
   is excreted in human milk.  Because many drugs are excreted in human milk and because of the potential for serious adverse reactions from Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection 
         
 
   in nursing infants, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.
        

 








8.4 Pediatric Use

Data from published literature support the intravenous use of neostigmine methylsulfate for reversal of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents in all pediatric age groups. 
Recovery of neuromuscular activity occurs more rapidly with smaller doses of cholinesterase inhibitors in infants and children than in adults.  However, infants and small children may be at greater risk of complications from incomplete reversal of neuromuscular blockade due to decreased respiratory reserve.  The risks associated with incomplete reversal outweigh any risk from giving higher doses of Neostigmine Methylsulfate (up to 0.07 mg/kg or up to a total of 5 mg, whichever is lower).
The dose of Neostigmine Methylsulfate required to reverse neuromuscular blockade in children varies between 0.03 mg to 0.07 mg/kg, the same dose range shown to be effective in adults, and should be selected using the same criteria as used for adult patients 
         
 
  [see Clinical Pharmacology (
          
  
   12.3)].
         
 
  

Since the blood pressure in pediatric patients, particularly infants and neonates is sensitive to changes in heart rate, the effects of an anticholinergic agent (e.g., atropine) should be observed prior to administration of neostigmine to lessen the probability of bradycardia and hypotension.








8.5 Geriatric Use

Elderly patients are likely to have decreased renal function, which may prolong the duration of action of neostigmine methylsulfate.  However, elderly patients also experience slower spontaneous recovery from neuromuscular blocking agents.  Therefore, dosage adjustments are generally not needed in geriatric patients; however, they should be monitored for longer periods than younger adults to assure additional doses of Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection are not required.  The duration of monitoring should be predicated on the anticipated duration of action for the neuromuscular blocking agents used on the patient.








8.6 Renal Impairment

Elimination half-life of neostigmine was prolonged in anephric patients compared to normal subjects, so neostigmine concentration may increase in patients with impaired renal functions.  Although no adjustments to Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection dosing appear to be warranted in patients with impaired renal function, they should be closely monitored for a longer period of time.

To assure the effects of the neuromuscular blocking agent, particularly one cleared by the kidneys, do not persist beyond those of Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection, the interval for re‐dosing the neuromuscular blocking agent during the surgical procedure may be useful in determining whether, and to what extent, post‐operative monitoring needs to be extended. 








8.7 Hepatic Impairment

The pharmacokinetics of neostigmine methylsulfate in patients with hepatic impairment have not been studied.  Neostigmine is metabolized by microsomal enzymes in the liver so neostigmine concentration may increase in patients with impaired hepatic functions.  Although no adjustments to the dosing of Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection appear to be warranted in patients with hepatic insufficiency, patients should be carefully monitored for a longer period of time.   
If hepatically cleared neuromuscular blocking agents were used during the surgical procedure, their duration of action may also be prolonged by hepatic insufficiency.  This could result in the effects of the neuromuscular blocking agent outlasting those of Neostigmine Methylsulfate Injection.  In this regard, the interval for re-dosing the neuromuscular blocking agent during the surgical procedure may be useful in determining whether, and to what extent, post-operative monitoring needs to be extended.
10 OVERDOSAGE

Muscarinic symptoms (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, increased bronchial and salivary secretions, and bradycardia) may appear with overdosage of neostigmine methylsulfate, but may be managed by the use of additional atropine or glycopyrrolate.  The possibility of iatrogenic overdose can be lessened by carefully monitoring the muscle twitch response to peripheral nerve stimulation.  Should overdosage occur, ventilation should be supported by artificial means until the adequacy of spontaneous respiration is assured, and cardiac function should be monitored. 
Overdosage of neostigmine may also cause a cholinergic crisis, which is characterized by increasing muscle weakness, and through involvement of the muscles of respiration, may result in death if not promptly treated.   
The treatment of an overdose of neostigmine includes immediate withdrawal of all anticholinergic medication and immediate use of atropine is also recommended.  Assistance of ventilation may be required if respiration is severely depressed.   
Myasthenic crisis, due to an increase in the severity of the disease, is also accompanied by extreme muscle weakness and may be difficult to distinguish from cholinergic crisis on a symptomatic basis.  However, such differentiation is extremely important because increases in the dose of neostigmine methylsulfate or other drugs in this class, in the presence of cholinergic crisis or of a refractory or “insensitive” state, could have grave consequences.  The two types of crises may be differentiated by the use of edrophonium chloride as well as by clinical judgment.  Treatment of the two conditions differs radically.  Whereas the presence of myasthenic crisis requires more intensive anticholinesterase therapy, cholinergic crisis calls for the prompt withdrawal of all drugs of this type.  The immediate use of atropine in cholinergic crisis is also recommended.  Atropine may also be used to lessen gastrointestinal side effects or other muscarinic reactions; but such use, by masking signs of overdosage, can lead to inadvertent induction of cholinergic crisis.