ADVERSE REACTIONS

Acute and prolonged hypotensive episodes, tachycardia, and cardiac arrhythmias have been reported. In addition, weakness, dizziness, flushing, orthostatic hypotension, nasal stuffiness, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may occur.
To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Precision Dose Inc. at 1-844-668-3942 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.
WARNINGS

Myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular spasm, and cerebrovascular occlusion have been reported to occur following the administration of Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP, usually in association with marked hypotensive episodes.
For screening tests in patients with hypertension, the generally available urinary assay of catecholamines or other biochemical assays have largely replaced the Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP and other pharmacological tests for reasons of accuracy and safety. None of the chemical or pharmacological tests is infallible in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. The Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP blocking test is not the procedure of choice and should be reserved for cases in which additional confirmatory evidence is necessary and the relative risks involved in conducting the test have been considered.
PRECAUTIONS





General

Tachycardia and cardiac arrhythmias may occur with the use of Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP or other alpha-adrenergic blocking agents. When possible, administration of cardiac glycosides should be deferred until cardiac rhythm returns to normal.








Drug Interactions

See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION, Diagnosis of pheochromocytoma, 
Preparation
. 








Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility

Long-term carcinogenicity studies, mutagenicity studies, and fertility studies have not been conducted with Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP .








Pregnancy Category C

Administration of Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP to pregnant rats and mice at oral doses 24-30 times the usual daily human dose (based on a 60-kg human) resulted in slightly decreased growth and slight skeletal immaturity of the fetuses. Immaturity was manifested by increased incidence of incomplete or unossified calcanei and phalangeal nuclei of the hind limb and of incompletely ossified sternebrae. At oral doses 60 times the usual daily human dose (based on a 60-kg human), a slightly lower rate of implantation was found in the rat. Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP did not affect embryonic or fetal development in the rabbit at oral doses 20 times the usual daily human dose (based on a 60-kg human). No teratogenic or embryo toxic effects were observed in the rat, mouse, or rabbit studies.
There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus.








Nursing Mothers

It is not known whether this drug is excreted in human milk. Because many drugs are excreted in human milk and because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants from Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.








Pediatric Use

See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
OVERDOSAGE





Acute Toxicity

No deaths due to acute poisoning with Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP have been reported. Oral LD50's (mg/kg): mice, 1000; rats, 1250.








Signs and Symptoms

Overdosage with Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP is characterized chiefly by cardiovascular disturbances, such as arrhythmias, tachycardia, hypotension, and possibly shock. In addition, the following might occur: excitation, headache, sweating, pupillary contraction, visual disturbances; nausea, vomiting, diarrhea; hypoglycemia.








Treatment

There is no specific antidote.
A decrease in blood pressure to dangerous levels or other evidence of shock like conditions should be treated vigorously and promptly. The patient's legs should be kept raised and a plasma expander should be administered. If necessary, intravenous infusion of norepinephrine, titrated to maintain blood pressure at the normotensive level, and all available supportive measures should be included. Epinephrine should not be used, since it may cause a paradoxical reduction in blood pressure.Acute Toxicity

No deaths due to acute poisoning with Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP have been reported. Oral LD50's (mg/kg): mice, 1000; rats, 1250.Signs and Symptoms

Overdosage with Phentolamine Mesylate for Injection, USP is characterized chiefly by cardiovascular disturbances, such as arrhythmias, tachycardia, hypotension, and possibly shock. In addition, the following might occur: excitation, headache, sweating, pupillary contraction, visual disturbances; nausea, vomiting, diarrhea; hypoglycemia.Treatment

There is no specific antidote.
A decrease in blood pressure to dangerous levels or other evidence of shock like conditions should be treated vigorously and promptly. The patient's legs should be kept raised and a plasma expander should be administered. If necessary, intravenous infusion of norepinephrine, titrated to maintain blood pressure at the normotensive level, and all available supportive measures should be included. Epinephrine should not be used, since it may cause a paradoxical reduction in blood pressure.