ADVERSE REACTIONS

The following adverse reactions have been observed, but there is not enough data to support an estimate of frequency. 
  
Cardiovascular:Tachycardia, palpitation. 
  
Allergic:Severe allergic reaction or drug idiosyncrasies including anaphylaxis. 
  
CNS:Headaches, nervousness, mental confusion, drowsiness, dizziness. 
  
Special Senses:Blurred vision, dilation of the pupil, cycloplegia, increased ocular tension, loss of taste. 
  
Renal:Urinary hesitancy and retention. 
  
Gastrointestinal:Nausea, vomiting, constipation, bloated feeling. 
  
Dermatologic:Decreased sweating, urticaria and other dermal manifestations. 
  
Miscellaneous:Xerostomia, weakness, insomnia, impotence, suppression of lactation.
WARNINGS


In the presence of high environmental temperature, heat prostration (fever and heat stroke due to decreased sweating) can occur with drug use. 
    Diarrhea may be an early symptom of incomplete intestinal obstruction, especially in patients with ileostomy or colostomy. In this instance treatment with this drug would be inappropriate and possibly harmful. 
    Methscopolamine bromide may produce drowsiness or blurred vision. The patient should be cautioned regarding activities requiring mental alertness such as operating a motor vehicle or other machinery or performing hazardous work while taking this drug. 
    With overdosage, a curare-like action may occur, i.e., neuromuscular blockade leading to muscular weakness and possible paralysis.
PRECAUTIONS





1. General precautions


Use Methscopolamine Bromide Tablets, 2.5 mg and 5 mg with caution in the elderly and in all patients with: autonomic neuropathy; hepatic or renal disease; or ulcerative colitis –large doses may suppress intestinal motility to the point of producing a paralytic ileus and for this reason precipitate or aggravate "toxic megacolon," a serious complication of the disease. 
    The drug also should be used with caution in patients having hyperthyroidism, coronary heart disease, congestive heart failure, tachyarrhythmia, tachycardia, hypertension, or prostatic hypertrophy.
 








2. Information for patient

See statement under
 
  WARNINGS.









3. Laboratory tests


Progress of the peptic ulcer under treatment should be followed by upper gastrointestinal contrast radiology or endoscopy to insure healing. Stool tests for occult blood and blood hemoglobin or hematocrit values should be followed to rule out bleeding from the ulcer.








4. Drug interactions


Additive anticholinergic effects may result from concomitant use with antipsychotics, tricyclic antidepressants, and other drugs with anticholinergic effects. Concomitant administration with antacids may interfere with the absorption of methscopolamine bromide.








5. Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility

No long-term studies in animals have been performed to evaluate carcinogenic potential.








6. Pregnancy


Teratogenic effects 
    Animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with methscopolamine bromide. It is also not known whether methscopolamine bromide can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman or can affect reproduction capacity. Methscopolamine bromide should be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed.
 








7. Nursing mothers


It is not known whether this drug is excreted in human milk. Because many drugs are excreted in human milk, caution should be exercised when methscopolamine bromide is administered to a nursing woman. 
    Anticholinergic drugs may suppress lactation.
 








8. Pediatric use

Safety and efficacy in children have not been established.
OVERDOSAGE


The symptoms of overdosage with Methscopolamine Bromide Tablets, 2.5 mg and 5 mg progress from intensification of the usual side effects to CNS disturbances (from restlessness and excitement to psychotic behavior), circulatory changes (flushing, fall in blood pressure, circulatory failure), respiratory failure, paralysis, and coma. 
    Measures to be taken are (1) induction of emesis and (2) injection of physostigmine 0.5 to 2 mg intravenously, and repeated as necessary up to a total of 5 mg. Fever may be treated symptomatically (alcohol sponging, ice packs). Excitement of a degree which demands attention may be managed with sodium thiopental 2% solution given slowly intravenously or chloral hydrate (100 to 200 mL of a 2% solution) by rectal infusion. In the event of progression of the curare-like effect to paralysis of the respiratory muscles, artificial respiration should be instituted and maintained until effective respiratory action returns. 
    The oral LD
 
  50in rats is 1,352 to 2,617 mg/kg. 
    No data is available on the dialyzability of methscopolamine bromide.