6 ADVERSE REACTIONS




Most common adverse reactions for a single 2 g dose of tinidazole (incidence >1%) are metallic/bitter taste, nausea, weakness/fatigue/malaise, dyspepsia/cramps/epigastric discomfort, vomiting, anorexia, headache, dizziness and constipation (6.1)


 To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Rising Pharmaceuticals, Inc. at 1-866-562-4597 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or 
www.fda.gov/medwatch










6.1 Clinical Studies Experience

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.
Among 3669 patients treated with a single 2 g dose of tinidazole, in both controlled and uncontrolled trichomoniasis and giardiasis clinical studies, adverse reactions were reported by 11.0% of patients. For multi-day dosing in controlled and uncontrolled amebiasis studies, adverse reactions were reported by 13.8% of 1765 patients. Common (≥1% incidence) adverse reactions reported by body system are as follows. (Note: Data described in Table 1 below are pooled from studies with variable designs and safety evaluations.)

Other adverse reactions reported with tinidazole include:

Central Nervous System: Two serious adverse reactions reported include convulsions and transient peripheral neuropathy including numbness and paresthesia [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]. Other CNS reports include vertigo, ataxia, giddiness, insomnia, drowsiness.
Gastrointestinal: tongue discoloration, stomatitis, diarrhea
Hypersensitivity: urticaria, pruritis, rash, flushing, sweating, dryness of mouth, fever, burning sensation, thirst, salivation, angioedema
Renal: darkened urine
Cardiovascular: palpitations
Hematopoietic: transient neutropenia, transient leukopenia
 Other: Candida overgrowth, increased vaginal discharge, oral candidiasis, hepatic abnormalities including raised transaminase level, arthralgias, myalgias, and arthritis.



                                         Table 1. Adverse Reactions Summary of Published Reports













2 g single dose

Multi-day dose



GI: Metallic/bitter taste 

3.7%

6.3%



      Nausea 

3.2%

4.5%



      Anorexia 

1.5%

2.5%



      Dyspepsia/cramps/epigastric discomfort 

1.8%

1.4%



      Vomiting 

1.5%

0.9%



      Constipation 

0.4%

1.4%



CNS: Weakness/fatigue/malaise 

2.1%

1.1%



          Dizziness 

1.1%

0.5%



Other: Headache 

1.3%

0.7%



Total patients with adverse reactions

11.0%(403/3669)

13.8%(244/1765)





 Rare reported adverse reactions include bronchospasm, dyspnea, coma, confusion, depression, furry tongue, pharyngitis and reversible thrombocytopenia. 

Adverse Reactions in Pediatric Patients: In pooled pediatric studies, adverse reactions reported in pediatric patients taking tinidazole were similar in nature and frequency to adult findings including nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, taste change, anorexia, and abdominal pain.

Bacterial vaginosis: The most common adverse reactions in treated patients (incidence >2%), which were not identified in the trichomoniasis, giardiasis and amebiasis studies, are gastrointestinal: decreased appetite, and flatulence; renal: urinary tract infection, painful urination, and urine abnormality; and other reactions including pelvic pain, vulvo-vaginal discomfort, vaginal odor, menorrhagia, and upper respiratory tract infection [See Clinical Studies (14.5)].










6.2 Postmarketing Experience

The following adverse reactions have been identified and reported during post-approval use of Tinidazole Tablets. Because the reports of these reactions are voluntary and the population is of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate the frequency of the reaction or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure.
Severe acute hypersensitivity reactions have been reported on initial or subsequent exposure to tinidazole. Hypersensitivity reactions may include urticaria, pruritis, angioedema, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and erythema multiforme.
WARNING: POTENTIAL RISK FOR CARCINOGENICITY


Carcinogenicity has been seen in mice and rats treated chronically with metronidazole, another nitroimidazole agent [see Nonclinical Toxicology (

13.1

)]. Although such data have not been reported for tinidazole, the two drugs are structurally related and have similar biologic effects. Limit use of Tinidazole Tablets to approved indications only [see Indications and Usage (

1.1

, 

1.2

, 

1.3

)]. Avoid chronic use [see Warnings and Precautions (

5.1

)].








WARNING: POTENTIAL RISK FOR CARCINOGENICITY
See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning.

 Carcinogenicity has been seen in mice and rats treated chronically with metronidazole, another nitroimidazole agent (13.1). Although such data have not been reported for tinidazole, the two drugs   are structurally related and have similar biologic effects. Limit use of Tinidazole Tablets to approved indications only (1.1, 1.2, 1.3). Avoid chronic use (5.1).
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS





Seizures and neuropathy have been reported. Discontinue Tinidazole Tablets if abnormal neurologic signs develop (5.1)
Vaginal candidiasis may develop with Tinidazole Tablets and require treatment with an antifungal agent (5.2)
Use Tinidazole Tablets with caution in patients with blood dyscrasias. Tinidazole Tablets may produce transient leukopenia and neutropenia (5.3,
7.3)








5.1 Potential for Genotoxicity and Carcinogenicity

Carcinogenicity has been seen in mice and rats treated chronically with nitroimidazole derivatives, which are structurally related to tinidazole [see Nonclinical Toxicology (13.1)]. Although such data have not been reported for tinidazole, the two drugs are structurally related and have similar biologic effects. However, it is unclear if the positive tumor findings in lifetime rodent studies indicate a risk to patients taking a short course or single dose of Tinidazole Tablet. Use should be limited to approved indications only. Avoid chronic use.








5.2 Neurological Adverse Reactions

Convulsive seizures and peripheral neuropathy, the latter characterized mainly by numbness or paresthesia of an extremity, have been reported in patients treated with tinidazole. The appearance of abnormal neurologic signs demands the prompt discontinuation of tinidazole therapy.








5.3 Vaginal Candidiasis

The use of tinidazole may result in Candida vaginitis. In a clinical study of 235 women who received tinidazole for bacterial vaginosis, a vaginal fungal infection developed in 11 (4.7%) of all study subjects [see Clinical Studies (14.5)].









5.4  Blood Dyscrasia

Tinidazole should be used with caution in patients with evidence of or history of blood dyscrasia [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].









5.5 Development of Drug-Resistant Bacteria

Prescribing Tinidazole Tablets in the absence of a proven or strongly suspected bacterial infection or a prophylactic indication is unlikely to provide benefit to the patient and increases the risk of the development of drug-resistant bacteria.
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS





Pediatric Use: Data on tinidazole use in children is limited to treatment of giardiasis and amebiasis in patients age 3 and older (8.4)
Hemodialysis patients: If tinidazole is administered the same day and prior to hemodialysis, administer an additional ½ dose after end of hemodialysis (8.6,
12.3)
Lactation: Breastfeeding is not recommended. Discontinue breastfeeding during and for 72 hours after the last dose of Tinidazole Tablet (8.2)









8.1 Pregnancy


Risk Summary 
 Available published data from a case-control study and case report with Tinidazole Tablets use in pregnant women are insufficient to identify a risk of major birth defects, miscarriage or adverse maternal or fetal outcomes. There are risks associated with untreated lower genital tract infections during pregnancy (see Clinical Considerations). In animal reproduction studies, oral administration of tinidazole to pregnant mice and rats during organogenesis at 6 and 3 times, respectively, the maximum recommended human dose (based on body surface area comparison) showed a slight increase in fetal mortality in rats at the highest dose, with no other adverse fetal effects noted in either species (see Data). 

The estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population is unknown. All pregnancies have a background risk of birth defect, loss, or other adverse outcomes. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2% to 4% and 15% to 20%, respectively. 


Data 

Animal Data
 Embryo-fetal developmental toxicity studies in pregnant mice administered oral tinidazole on gestation days (GD) 7 to 12 indicated no embryo-fetal toxicity or malformations at the highest dose level of 2,500 mg/kg (approximately 6.3-fold the highest human therapeutic dose based upon body surface area conversions). In a study with pregnant rats administered oral tinidazole on GD 9 to 14, a slightly higher incidence of fetal mortality was observed at a maternal dose of 500 mg/kg (2.5-fold the highest human therapeutic dose based upon body surface area conversions). No biologically relevant neonatal developmental effects were observed in surviving rat neonates following maternal doses as high as 600 mg/kg (3-fold the highest human therapeutic dose based upon body surface area conversions).








8.2 Lactation



Risk Summary
 Limited published literature, based on breast milk sampling, reports that tinidazole is present in human milk. There are no reports of adverse effects on the breastfed infant and no information on the effects of tinidazole on milk production. Because of the potential for serious adverse reactions, including tumorigenicity, advise patients that breastfeeding is not recommended during treatment with Tinidazole Tablets and for 72 hours (based on half-life) after administration of Tinidazole Tablets. 


Clinical Considerations
 A nursing mother may choose to pump and discard her milk during treatment and for 72 hours after administration of Tinidazole Tablets to minimize exposure to the breastfeeding infant. 









8.3 Females and Males of Reproductive Potential Infertility


Infertility 

Males 
 Based on findings in rodents, Tinidazole may impair fertility in males of reproductive potential. It is not known whether effects on fertility are reversible [see Nonclinical Toxicology (13.1)]. 











8.4 Pediatric Use

Other than for use in the treatment of giardiasis and amebiasis in pediatric patients older than three years of age, safety and effectiveness of tinidazole in pediatric patients have not been established.

Pediatric Administration: For those unable to swallow tablets, tinidazole tablets may be crushed in artificial cherry syrup, to be taken with food [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].









8.5 Geriatric Use

Clinical studies of tinidazole did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects. In general, dose selection for an elderly patient should be cautious, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function, and of concomitant disease or other drug therapy.








8.6 Renal Impairment

Because the pharmacokinetics of tinidazole in patients with severe renal impairment (CrCL < 22 mL/min) are not significantly different from those in healthy subjects, no dose adjustments are necessary in these patients.

Patients undergoing hemodialysis: If tinidazole is administered on the same day as and prior to hemodialysis, it is recommended that an additional dose of tinidazole equivalent to one-half of the recommended dose be administered after the end of the hemodialysis [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].









8.7 Hepatic Impairment

There are no data on tinidazole pharmacokinetics in patients with impaired hepatic function. Reduced elimination of metronidazole, a chemically-related nitroimidazole, has been reported in this population. Usual recommended doses of tinidazole should be administered cautiously in patients with hepatic dysfunction [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
10 OVERDOSAGE

There are no reported overdoses with tinidazole in humans.

Treatment of Overdosage: There is no specific antidote for the treatment of overdosage with tinidazole; therefore, treatment should be symptomatic and supportive. Gastric lavage may be helpful. Hemodialysis can be considered because approximately 43% of the amount present in the body is eliminated during a 6-hour hemodialysis session.