6 ADVERSE REACTIONS


The following clinically significant adverse reactions are described in detail in other labeling sections:

Myelosuppression [
        
  
   see 
         
   
    Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
]
       
 
  
Malignancies [
        
  
   see 
         
   
    Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
]
       
 
  
Vasculitic toxicities [
        
  
   see 
         
   
    Warnings and Precautions (5.4
)
]
       
 
  
Risks with concomitant use of antiretroviral drugs [
        
  
   see 
         
   
    Warnings and Precautions (5.6)
]
       
 
  
Radiation recall [see 
        
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.7)]
       
 
  
Macrocytosis [see 
        
  
   
Warnings and Precautions (5.8)
]
       
 
  
Pulmonary Toxicity 
        
  
   [see 
         
   
    Warnings and Precautions (5.9)]
        
  
   







Most common adverse reactions (≥30%) are hematological, gastrointestinal symptoms, and anorexia. 
         
 
    (6) 
        

   

To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Par Pharmaceutical at 1-800-828-9393 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.









6.1 Postmarketing Experience


The following adverse reactions have been identified during post-approval use of hydroxyurea capsules.  Because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency.


Reproductive System and Breast disorders: azoospermia, and oligospermia
         
 
  

Gastrointestinal disorders: stomatitis, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and constipation
         
 
  

Metabolism and Nutrition disorders: anorexia, tumor lysis syndrome 
         
 
  


Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders:
maculopapular rash, skin ulceration, cutaneous lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis-like skin changes, peripheral and facial erythema, hyperpigmentation,  nail hyperpigmentation, atrophy of skin and nails, scaling, violet papules, and alopecia
         
 
  

Renal and urinary disorders: dysuria, elevations in serum uric acid, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and creatinine levels
         
 
  

Nervous system disorders: headache, dizziness, drowsiness, disorientation, hallucinations, and convulsions
         
 
  

General Disorders: fever, chills, malaise, edema, and asthenia
         
 
  

Hepatobiliary disorders: elevation of hepatic enzymes, cholestasis, and hepatitis
         
 
  

Respiratory disorders: diffuse pulmonary infiltrates, dyspnea, and pulmonary fibrosis, interstitial lung disease, pneumonitis, alveolitis, allergic alveolitis and cough 
         
 
  

Immune disorders: systemic lupus erythematosus
         
 
  

Hypersensitivity: Drug-induced fever (pyrexia) (>39°C, >102°F) requiring hospitalization has been reported concurrently with gastrointestinal, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, hepatobiliary, dermatological or cardiovascular manifestations. Onset typically occurred within 6 weeks of initiation and resolved upon discontinuation of hydroxyurea. Upon re-administration fever re-occurred typically within 24 hours
         
 
  

Adverse reactions observed with combined hydroxyurea and irradiation therapy are similar to those reported with the use of hydroxyurea or radiation treatment alone. These effects primarily include bone marrow depression (anemia and leukopenia), gastric irritation, and mucositis. Almost all patients receiving an adequate course of combined hydroxyurea and irradiation therapy will demonstrate concurrent leukopenia. Platelet depression (<100,000 cells/mm
         
 
  3) has occurred in the presence of marked leukopenia. Hydroxyurea capsules may potentiate some adverse reactions usually seen with irradiation alone, such as gastric distress and mucositis.
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS







Myelosuppression: Do not give if bone marrow function is markedly depressed. Monitor hematology labs and interrupt, reduce dose as appropriate. 
          
  
     (5.1) 
         
 
    
Malignancies: Advise protection from sun exposure and monitor for secondary malignancies. 
          
  
     (5.2) 
         
 
    
Embryo-fetal toxicity: Can cause fetal harm. Advise of potential risk to a fetus and use of effective contraception. (
          
  
     5.3,
          
  
      8.1, 
          
  
     8.3)
         
 
    
Vasculitic toxicities: Discontinue hydroxyurea and initiate treatment if this occurs. 
          
  
     (5.4) 
         
 
    
Live Vaccinations: Avoid live vaccine use in a patient taking hydroxyurea capsules. 
          
  
     (5.5) 
         
 
    
Risks with concomitant use of antiretroviral drugs: Pancreatitis, hepatotoxicity, and neuropathy have occurred. Monitor for signs and symptoms in patients with HIV infection using antiretroviral drugs; discontinue hydroxyurea capsules, and implement treatment. 
          
  
     (5.6) 
         
 
    
Radiation recall: Monitor for skin erythema in patients who previously received radiation and manage symptomatically. 
          
  
     (5.7) 
         
 
    









5.1 Myelosuppression


Hydroxyurea causes severe myelosuppression. Treatment with hydroxyurea should not be initiated if bone marrow function is markedly depressed. Bone marrow suppression may occur, and leukopenia is generally its first and most common manifestation. Thrombocytopenia and anemia occur less often and are seldom seen without a preceding leukopenia.  Bone marrow depression is more likely in patients who have previously received radiotherapy or cytotoxic cancer chemotherapeutic agents; use hydroxyurea cautiously in such patients.
Evaluate hematologic status prior to and during treatment with hydroxyurea capsules. Provide supportive care and modify dose or discontinue hydroxyurea as needed. Recovery from myelosuppression is usually rapid when therapy is interrupted.









5.2 Malignancies


Hydroxyurea is a human carcinogen. In patients receiving long-term hydroxyurea for myeloproliferative disorders, secondary leukemia has been reported
         
 
  . Skin cancer has also been reported in patients receiving long-term hydroxyurea. Advise protection from sun exposure and monitor for the development of secondary malignancies.
        

 









5.3 Embryo-Fetal Toxicity


Based on the mechanism of action and findings in animals, hydroxyurea can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. Hydroxyurea was embryotoxic and teratogenic in rats and rabbits at doses 0.8 times and 0.3 times, respectively, the maximum recommended human daily dose on a mg/m
         
 
  2 basis.  Advise pregnant women of the potential risk to a fetus [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Use in Specific Populations (8.1)].
         
 
  

Advise females of reproductive potential to use effective contraception during and after treatment with hydroxyurea capsules for at least 6 months after therapy.  Advise males of reproductive potential to use effective contraception during and after treatment with hydroxyurea capsules for at least 1 year after therapy 
         
 
  [see Use in Specific Populations 
          
  
   (8.1, 
          
  
   
8.3


)


].
        

 









5.4 Vasculitic Toxicities


Cutaneous vasculitic toxicities, including vasculitic ulcerations and gangrene, have occurred in patients with myeloproliferative disorders during therapy with hydroxyurea. These vasculitic toxicities were reported most often in patients with a history of, or currently receiving, interferon therapy. If cutaneous vasculitic ulcers occur, institute treatment and discontinue hydroxyurea capsules.









5.5 Live Vaccinations


Avoid use of live vaccine in patients taking hydroxyurea capsules. Concomitant use of hydroxyurea capsules with a live virus vaccine may potentiate the replication of the virus and/or may increase the adverse reaction of the vaccine because normal defense mechanisms may be suppressed by hydroxyurea capsules. Vaccination with live vaccines in a patient receiving hydroxyurea capsules may result in severe infection. Patient’s antibody response to vaccines may be decreased. Consider consultation with a specialist.









5.6 Risks with Concomitant Use of Antiretroviral Drugs


Pancreatitis, hepatotoxicity, and peripheral neuropathy have occurred when hydroxyurea was administered concomitantly with antiretroviral drugs, including didanosine and stavudine 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Drug Interactions (7.1)]
         
 
  .
        

 









5.7 Radiation Recall


Patients who have received irradiation therapy in the past may have an exacerbation of post-irradiation erythema. Monitor for skin erythema in patients who previously received radiation and manage symptomatically.









5.8 Macrocytosis


Hydroxyurea capsules may cause macrocytosis, which is self-limiting, and is often seen early in the course of treatment. The morphologic change resembles pernicious anemia, but is not related to vitamin B
         
 
  12 or folic acid deficiency. This may mask the diagnosis of pernicious anemia. Prophylactic administration of folic acid is recommended.
        

 









5.9  Pulmonary Toxicity


Interstitial lung disease including pulmonary fibrosis, lung infiltration, pneumonitis, and alveolitis/allergic alveolitis (including fatal cases) have been reported in patients treated for myeloproliferative neoplasm. Monitor patients developing pyrexia, cough, dyspnea, or other respiratory symptoms frequently, investigate and treat promptly. Discontinue Hydroxyurea capsules and manage with corticosteroids 
         
 
  [see Adverse Reactions (
          
  
   6.1)]
         
 
  .
        

 









5.10 Laboratory Test Interference


Interference with Uric Acid, Urea, or Lactic Acid Assays is possible, rendering falsely elevated results of these in patients treated with hydroxyurea 
         
 
  [see Drug Interactions (
          
  
   7.2)].
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS








Lactation: Advise women not to breastfeed. (
           
   
      8.2)
          
  
     


Geriatric Use: Care should be taken in dose selection and may require a lower dose regimen and monitoring of renal function.  
          
  
     (8.5) 
         
 
    









8.1 Pregnancy



Risk Summary

Hydroxyurea capsules can cause fetal harm based on findings from animal studies and the drug’s mechanism of action [see 
         
 
  
Clinical Pharmacology (12.1)
]. There are no data with hydroxyurea capsules use in pregnant women to inform a drug-associated risk. In animal reproduction studies, administration of hydroxyurea to pregnant rats and rabbits during organogenesis produced embryotoxic and teratogenic effects at doses 0.8 times and 0.3 times, respectively, the maximum recommended human daily dose on a mg/m
         
 
  2 basis (
         
 
  see Data). Advise women of the potential risk to a fetus and to avoid becoming pregnant while being treated with hydroxyurea capsules.
        

 
In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2% to 4% and 15% to 20%, respectively.

Data


Animal Data

Hydroxyurea has been demonstrated to be a potent teratogen in a wide variety of animal models, including mice, hamsters, cats, miniature swine, dogs, and monkeys at doses within 1-fold of the human dose given on a mg/m
         
 
  2 basis. Hydroxyurea is embryotoxic and causes fetal malformations (partially ossified cranial bones, absence of eye sockets, hydrocephaly, bipartite sternebrae, missing lumbar vertebrae) at 180 mg/kg/day (about 0.8 times the maximum recommended human daily dose on a mg/m
         
 
  2 basis) in rats and at 30 mg/kg/day (about 0.3 times the maximum recommended human daily dose on a mg/m
         
 
  2 basis) in rabbits. Embryotoxicity was characterized by decreased fetal viability, reduced live litter sizes, and developmental delays. Hydroxyurea crosses the placenta. Single doses of ≥375 mg/kg (about 1.7 times the maximum recommended human daily dose on a mg/m
         
 
  2 basis) to rats caused growth retardation and impaired learning ability.
        

 









8.2 Lactation



Risk Summary

Hydroxyurea is excreted in human milk. Because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in a breastfed infant from hydroxyurea, including carcinogenicity, discontinue breastfeeding during treatment with hydroxyurea capsules.









8.3 Females and Males of Reproductive Potential



Pregnancy Testing

Verify the pregnancy status of females of reproductive potential prior to initiating hydroxyurea capsules therapy.

Contraception


Females

Hydroxyurea capsules can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Use in Specific Populations (8.1)
]. Advise females of reproductive potential to use effective contraception during and after treatment with hydroxyurea capsules for at least 6 months after therapy. Advise females to immediately report pregnancy.
        

 

Males

Hydroxyurea capsules may damage spermatozoa and testicular tissue, resulting in possible genetic abnormalities. Males with female sexual partners of reproductive potential should use effective contraception during and after treatment with hydroxyurea capsules for at least 1 year after therapy [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Nonclinical Toxicology (13.1)
]. 
        

 

Infertility


Males

Based on findings in animals and humans, male fertility may be compromised by treatment with hydroxyurea capsules. Azoospermia or oligospermia, sometimes reversible, has been observed in men. Inform male patients about the possibility of sperm conservation before the start of therapy [
         
 
  see 
          
  
   Adverse Reactions (6) and 
          
  
   Nonclinical Toxicology (13.1)].
         
 
  










8.4 Pediatric Use


Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been established.









8.5 Geriatric Use


Elderly patients may be more sensitive to the effects of hydroxyurea, and may require a lower dose regimen. Hydroxyurea is excreted by the kidney, and the risk of adverse reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful to monitor renal function 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Dosage and Administration (2.3)

].
        

 










​

8.6 Renal Impairment


The exposure to hydroxyurea is higher in patients with creatinine clearance of less than 60 mL/min or in patients with end-stage renal desease (ESRD). Reduce dosage and closely monitor the hematologic parameters when hydroxyurea capsules is to be administered to these patients 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Dosage and Administration (2.3)

 and 
          
  
   Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
].
        

 









8.7 Hepatic Impairment


There are no data that support specific guidance for dosage adjustment in patients with hepatic impairment. Close monitoring of hematologic parameters is advised in these patients.
10 OVERDOSAGE


Acute mucocutaneous toxicity has been reported in patients receiving hydroxyurea at dosages several times the therapeutic dose. Soreness, violet erythema, edema on palms and soles followed by scaling of hands and feet, severe generalized hyperpigmentation of the skin, and stomatitis have also been observed.