6 ADVERSE REACTIONS

The following adverse reactions are discussed in more detail in other sections of the labeling:

Myelosuppression
  
   [see
   
    
Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]
   
    


Seizures
  
   [see
   
    
Warnings and Precautions (5.2


)]

Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease (HVOD)
  
   [see
   
    
Warnings and Precautions (5.3)
   
    

]

Embryo-fetal Toxicity
  
   [see
   
    
Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]
   
    


Cardiac Tamponade
  
   [see
   
    
Warnings and Precautions (5.5)]
   
    


Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia
  
   [see
   
    
Warnings and Precautions (5.6)]
   
    


Cellular Dysplasia
  
   [see
   
    
Warnings and Precautions (5.7)]
   
    








Most common adverse reactions (incidence > 60%) were: myelosuppression, nausea, stomatitis, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, insomnia, fever, hypomagnesemia, abdominal pain, anxiety, headache, hyperglycemia and hypokalemia (
 
    6.1)

   


To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Accord Healthcare Inc. at 1-866-941-7875 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or
  
     www.fda.gov/medwatch.









6.1 Clinical Trials Experience

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.
Adverse reaction information is primarily derived from the clinical study (N=61) of Busulfan Injection and the data obtained for high-dose oral busulfan conditioning in the setting of randomized, controlled trials identified through a literature review.
In the Busulfan Injection allogeneic stem cell transplantation clinical trial, all patients were treated with Busulfan 0.8 mg per kg as a two-hour infusion every six hours for 16 doses over four days, combined with cyclophosphamide 60 mg per kg x2 days. Ninety-three percent (93%) of evaluable patients receiving this dose of Busulfan maintained an AUC less than 1,500 µM•min for dose 9, which has generally been considered the level that minimizes the risk of HVOD.
Table 1 lists the non-hematologic adverse reactions events through Bone Marrow Transplantation (BMT) Day +28 at a rate greater than or equal to 20% in patients treated with Busulfan Injection prior to allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation.

Table 1: Summary of the Incidence (greater than or equal to 20%) of Non-Hematologic Adverse Reactions through BMT Day +28 in Patients who Received Busulfan Injection Prior to Allogeneic Hematopoietic Progenitor Cell Transplantation





1. Includes all reported adverse reactions regardless of severity (toxicity grades 1-4)







Non-Hematological Adverse Reactions
      
       
1






Percent Incidence





BODY AS A WHOLE





        Fever


80




        Headache


69




        Asthenia


51




        Chills


46




        Pain


44




        Edema General


28




        Allergic Reaction


26




        Chest Pain


26




        Inflammation at Injection Site


25




        Back Pain


23




CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM





        Tachycardia


44




        Hypertension


36




        Thrombosis


33




        Vasodilation


25




DIGESTIVE SYSTEM





        Nausea


98




        Stomatitis (Mucositis)


97




        Vomiting


95




        Anorexia


85




        Diarrhea


84




        Abdominal Pain


72




        Dyspepsia


44




        Constipation


38




        Dry Mouth


26




        Rectal Disorder


25




        Abdominal Enlargement


23




METABOLIC AND NUTRITIONAL SYSTEM





        Hypomagnesemia


77




        Hyperglycemia


66




        Hypokalemia


64




        Hypocalcemia


49




        Hyperbilirubinemia


49




        Edema


36




        SGPT Elevation


31




        Creatinine Increased


21




NERVOUS SYSTEM





        Insomnia


84




        Anxiety


72




        Dizziness


30




        Depression


23




RESPIRATORY SYSTEM





        Rhinitis


44




        Lung Disorder


34




        Cough


28




        Epistaxis


25




        Dyspnea


25




SKIN AND APPENDAGES





        Rash


57




        Pruritus


28






Additional Adverse Reactions by Body System



Hematologic
:
Prolonged prothrombin time

 

Gastrointestinal:
  
   
Esophagitis, ileus, hematemesis, pancreatitis, rectal discomfort

 

Hepatic:
  
   
Alkaline phosphatase increases, jaundice, hepatomegaly

 

Graft-versus-host disease:Graft-versus-host disease. There were 3 deaths (5%) attributed to GVHD.

 

Edema:Hypervolemia, or documented weight increase

 

Infection:Infection, pneumonia (fatal in one patient and life-threatening in 3% of patients)

 

Cardiovascular:Arrhythmia, atrial fibrillation, ventricular extrasystoles, third degree heart block, thrombosis (all episodes were associated with the central venous catheter), hypotension, flushing and hot flashes, cardiomegaly, ECG abnormality, left-sided heart failure, and pericardial effusion

 

Pulmonary
:
Hyperventilation, alveolar hemorrhage (fatal in 3%), pharyngitis, hiccup, asthma, atelectasis, pleural effusion, hypoxia, hemoptysis, sinusitis, and interstitial fibrosis (fatal in a single case)

 

Neurologic:Cerebral hemorrhage, coma, delirium, agitation, encephalopathy, confusion, hallucinations, lethargy, somnolence

 

Renal:BUN increased, dysuria, oliguria, hematuria, hemorrhagic cystitis

 

Skin:Alopecia, vesicular rash, maculopapular rash, vesiculo-bullous rash, exfoliative dermatitis, erythema nodosum, acne, skin discoloration

 

Metabolic:Hypophosphatemia, hyponatremia

 

Other Events:Injection site pain, myalgia, arthralgia, ear disorder

 








6.2 Postmarketing Experience

Because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure. The following adverse reactions have been identified during post-approval use of Busulfan Injection:

Blood and Lymphatic System Disorders: febrile neutropenia

 

Gastrointestinal Disorders: tooth hypoplasia

 

Metabolism and Nutrition Disorders: tumor lysis syndrome

 

Vascular Disorders: thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA)

 

Infections and Infestations: severe bacterial, viral (e.g., cytomegalovirus viremia) and fungal infections; and sepsis.

 








6.3 Oral Busulfan Literature Review

A literature review identified four randomized, controlled trials that evaluated a high-dose oral busulfan-containing conditioning regimen for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in the setting of CML
 
  [see
  
   
Clinical Studies (14)]
  
   
. The safety outcomes reported in those trials are summarized in Table 2 below for a mixed population of hematological malignancies (AML, CML, and ALL).

 

Table 2: Summary of safety analyses from the randomized, controlled trials utilizing a high dose oral busulfan-containing conditioning regimen that were identified in a literature review.










1. TRM = Transplantation Related Mortality
2. VOD = Veno-Occlusive Disease of the liver
3. GVHD = Graft versus Host Disease







Clift






CML Chronic Phase





TRM
     
      
1




VOD
     
      
2




GVHD
     
      
3




Pulmonary


Hemorrhagic


Seizure








Cystitis





Death


No Report


Acute≥Grade 2


1 death from


No Report


No Report




≤100d



=35%


Idiopathic






=4.1%



Chronic=41%


Interstitial






(3/73)



(30/73)


Pneumonitis









And









1 death from









Pulmonary









Fibrosis







Devergie






CML Chronic Phase





TRM


VOD


GVHD


Pulmonary


Hemorrhagic


Seizure








Cystitis





38%


7.7% (5/65)


Acute≥Grade 2


Interstitial


10.8% (7/65)


No Report





Deaths=4.6%


=41%


Pneumonitis=







(3/65)


(24/59 at risk)


16.9% (11/65)







Ringden






CML, AML, ALL





TRM


VOD


GVHD


Pulmonary


Hemorrhagic


Seizure








Cystitis





28%


12%


Acute≥Grade 2


Interstitial


24%


6%






GVHD=26%


Pneumonitis








Chronic GVHD


=14%








=45%








Blume






CML, AML, ALL





TRM


VOD


GVHD


Pulmonary


Hemorrhagic


Seizure








Cystitis





No Report


Deaths


Acute≥Grade 2


No Report


No Report


No Report





=4.9%


GVHD=22%









(13/58 at risk)









Chronic GVHD









=31%









(14/45 at risk)
WARNING: MYELOSUPPRESSION


Busulfan Injection causes severe and prolonged myelosuppression at the recommended dosage. Hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation is required to prevent potentially fatal complications of the prolonged myelosuppression.
  
   [see



Warnings and Precautions (5.1)



].







WARNING: MYELOSUPPRESSION


See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning.




Causes severe and prolonged myelosuppression (
   
      5.1).
  
     


Hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation is required to prevent potentially fatal complications of the prolonged myelosuppression (
   
      5.1)
  
     .
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS





Seizures: Initiate anticonvulsant prophylactic therapy prior to treatment with Busulfan Injection. Monitor patients with history of seizure disorder, head trauma or receiving epileptogenic drugs (
  
     5.2)
 
    
Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease (HVOD): Increased risk of developing HVOD at AUC greater than 1,500 µM•min. Monitor serum transaminases, alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin daily (
  
     5.3)
 
    
Embryo-fetal Toxicity: Can cause fetal harm. Advise of potential risk to a fetus and use of effective contraception (
  
     5.4,
  
     8.1,
  
     8.3)
 
    
Cardiac tamponade has been reported in pediatric patients with thalassemia who received high doses of oral busulfan and cyclophosphamide. Abdominal pain and vomiting preceded the tamponade in most patients (
  
     5.5)
 
    








5.1 Myelosuppression

The most frequent serious consequence of treatment with Busulfan Injection at the recommended dose and schedule is prolonged myelosuppression, occurring in all patients (100%). Severe granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia, or any combination thereof may develop. Hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation is required to prevent potentially fatal complications of the prolonged myelosuppression. Monitor complete blood counts, including white blood cell differentials, and quantitative platelet counts daily during treatment and until engraftment is demonstrated. Absolute neutrophil counts dropped below 0.5x10
 
  9/L at a median of 4 days post-transplant in 100% of patients treated in the Busulfan Injection clinical trial. The absolute neutrophil count recovered at a median of 13 days following allogeneic transplantation when prophylactic filgrastim was used in the majority of patients. Thrombocytopenia (less than 25,000/mm
 
  3or requiring platelet transfusion) occurred at a median of 5-6 days in 98% of patients. Anemia (hemoglobin less than 8.0 g/dL) occurred in 69% of patients. Use antibiotic therapy and platelet and red blood cell support when medically indicated.

 








5.2 Seizures

Seizures have been reported in patients receiving high-dose oral busulfan at doses producing plasma drug levels similar to those achieved following the recommended dosage of Busulfan Injection. Despite prophylactic therapy with phenytoin, one seizure (1/42 patients) was reported during an autologous transplantation clinical trial of Busulfan Injection. This episode occurred during the cyclophosphamide portion of the conditioning regimen, 36 hours after the last Busulfan Injection dose. Initiate phenytoin therapy or any other alternative anti-convulsant prophylactic therapy (e.g., benzodiazepines, valproic acid or levetiracetam) prior to Busulfan Injection treatment
 
  [see
  
   
Dosage and Administration (2.1)


]. Use caution when administering the recommended dose of Busulfan Injection to patients with a history of a seizure disorder or head trauma or who are receiving other potentially epileptogenic drugs.

 








5.3 Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease (HVOD)

Current literature suggests that high busulfan area under the plasma concentration verses time curve (AUC) values (greater than 1,500 µM•min) may be associated with an increased risk of developing HVOD. Patients who have received prior radiation therapy, greater than or equal to three cycles of chemotherapy, or a prior progenitor cell transplant may be at an increased risk of developing HVOD with the recommended Busulfan Injection dose and regimen. Based on clinical examination and laboratory findings, HVOD was diagnosed in 8% (5/61) of patients treated with Busulfan Injection in the setting of allogeneic transplantation, was fatal in 2/5 cases (40%), and yielded an overall mortality from HVOD in the entire study population of 2/61 (3%).Three of the five patients diagnosed with HVOD were retrospectively found to meet the Jones’ criteria. The incidence of HVOD reported in the literature from the randomized, controlled trials was 7.7%-12%
 
  [see
  
   
Clinical Studies (14)


].Monitor serum transaminases, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin daily through BMT Day +28 to detect hepatotoxicity, which may herald the onset of HVOD.

 








5.4 Embryo-fetal Toxicity

Busulfan Injection can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman based on animal data. Busulfan was teratogenic in mice, rats, and rabbits. The solvent, DMA, may also cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman based on findings in animals. Advise pregnant women of the potential risk to a fetus. Advise females and males of reproductive potential to use effective contraception during and after treatment with Busulfan Injection
 
  [see
  
   
Use in Specific Populations (8.1,
   
    8.3)











5.5 Cardiac Tamponade

Cardiac tamponade has been reported in pediatric patients with thalassemia (8/400 or 2% in one series) who received high doses of oral busulfan and cyclophosphamide as the preparatory regimen for hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation. Six of the eight children died and two were saved by rapid pericardiocentesis. Abdominal pain and vomiting preceded the tamponade in most patients. Monitor for signs and symptoms, promptly evaluate and treat if cardiac tamponade is suspected.








5.6 Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia

Bronchopulmonary dysplasia with pulmonary fibrosis is a rare but serious complication following chronic busulfan therapy. The average onset of symptoms is 4 years after therapy (range 4 months to 10 years)
 
  .









5.7 Cellular Dysplasia

Busulfan may cause cellular dysplasia in many organs. Cytologic abnormalities characterized by giant, hyperchromatic nuclei have been reported in lymph nodes, pancreas, thyroid, adrenal glands, liver, lungs and bone marrow. This cytologic dysplasia may be severe enough to cause difficulty in the interpretation of exfoliative cytologic examinations of the lungs, bladder, breast and the uterine cervix
 
  .
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS





Lactation: Advise women not to breastfeed. (
  
     8.2)
 
    








8.1 Pregnancy


Risk Summary

Busulfan Injection can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman based on animal data. Busulfan was teratogenic in mice, rats, and rabbits following administration during organogenesis. The solvent, DMA, may also cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. In rats, DMA doses of approximately 40% of the daily dose of DMA in the Busulfan dose on a mg/m
 
  2basis given during organogenesis caused significant developmental anomalies (
 
  see Data). There are no available human data informing the drug-associated risk. Advise pregnant women of the potential risk to a fetus.

 
The background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated populations are unknown. However, the background risk in the U.S. general population of major birth defects is 2-4% and of miscarriage is 15-20% of clinically recognized pregnancies.

Animal Data

Following administration during organogenesis in animals, busulfan caused malformations and anomalies, including significant alterations in the musculoskeletal system, body weight gain, and size. In pregnant rats, busulfan produced sterility in both male and female offspring due to the absence of germinal cells in the testes and ovaries. The solvent, DMA, administered to rats at doses of 400 mg/kg/day (about 40% of the daily dose of N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMA) in the Busulfan Injection dose on a mg/m
 
  2basis) during organogenesis caused significant developmental anomalies. The most striking abnormalities included anasarca, cleft palate, vertebral anomalies, rib anomalies, and serious anomalies of the vessels of the heart.

 








8.2 Lactation


Risk Summary

It is not known whether Busulfan Injection is present in human milk. Because many drugs are excreted in human milk and because of the potential for tumorigenicity shown for busulfan in human and animal studies, discontinue breastfeeding during treatment with Busulfan Injection.








8.3 Females and Males of Reproductive Potential


Contraception


Females

Busulfan Injection can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman
 
  [see
  
   
Use in Specific Populations (8.1)]
  
   
. Advise females of reproductive potential to use effective contraception during treatment with Busulfan Injection and for 6 months following cessation of therapy.

 

Males

Busulfan Injection may damage spermatozoa and testicular tissue, resulting in possible genetic fetal abnormalities. Males with female sexual partners of reproductive potential should use effective contraception during treatment with Busulfan Injection and for 3 months after cessation of therapy
 
  [see
  
   
Nonclinical Toxicology (13.1)].
  
   



Infertility


Females

Ovarian suppression and amenorrhea commonly occur in premenopausal women undergoing chronic, low-dose busulfan therapy for chronic myelogenous leukemia. Busulfan Injection may cause temporary or permanent infertility in prepubertal girls or in females of child-bearing potential treated with high-dose Busulfan Injection in the conditioning regimen prior to allogeneic hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation.

Males

Sterility, azoospermia, and testicular atrophy have been reported in male patients.








8.4 Pediatric Use

The effectiveness of Busulfan Injection in the treatment of CML has not been specifically studied in pediatric patients. An open-label, uncontrolled study evaluated the pharmacokinetics of Busulfan Injection in 24 pediatric patients receiving Busulfan Injection as part of a conditioning regimen administered prior to hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation for a variety of malignant hematologic (N=15) or non-malignant diseases (N=9). Patients ranged in age from 5 months to 16 years (median 3 years). Busulfan Injection dosing was targeted to achieve an area under the plasma concentration curve (AUC) of 900-1350 µM•min with an initial dose of 0.8 mg per kg or 1.0 mg per kg (based on Actual Body Weight (ABW)) if the patient was greater than 4 or less than or equal to 4 years, respectively. The dose was adjusted based on plasma concentration after completion of dose 1.
Patients received Busulfan Injection doses every six hours as a two-hour infusion over four days for a total of 16 doses, followed by cyclophosphamide 50 mg per kg once daily for four days. After one rest day, hematopoietic progenitor cells were infused. All patients received phenytoin as seizure prophylaxis. The target AUC (900-1350±5% µM•min) for Busulfan Injection was achieved at dose 1 in 71% (17/24) of patients. Steady state pharmacokinetic testing was performed at dose 9 and 13. Busulfan Injection levels were within the target range for 21 of 23 evaluable patients.
All 24 patients experienced neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count (ANC) less than 0.5x10
 
  9/L) and thrombocytopenia (platelet transfusions or platelet count less than 20,000/mm
 
  3). Seventy-nine percent (19/24) of patients experienced lymphopenia (absolute lymphocyte count less than 0.1x10
 
  9). In 23 patients, the ANC recovered to greater than 0.5x10
 
  9/L (median time to recovery = BMT day +13; range = BMT day +9 to +22). One patient who died on day +20 had not recovered to an ANC >0.5x10
 
  9/L.

 
Four (17%) patients died during the study. Two patients died within 28 days of transplant; one with pneumonia and capillary leak syndrome, and the other with pneumonia and veno-occlusive disease. Two patients died prior to day 100; one due to progressive disease and one due to multi-organ failure.
Adverse reactions were reported in all 24 patients during the study period (BMT day -10 through BMT day +28) or post-study surveillance period (day +29 through +100). These included vomiting (100%), nausea (83%), stomatitis (79%), HVOD (21%), graft-versus host disease (GVHD) (25%), and pneumonia (21%).
Based on the results of this 24-patient clinical trial, a suggested dosing regimen of Busulfan Injection in pediatric patients is shown in the following dosing nomogram:







Busulfan Injection Dosing Nomogram






Patient’s Actual Body Weight (ABW)




Busulfan Injection Dosage





less than or equal to 12 kgs


1.1 (mg per kg)




greater than 12 kgs


0.8 (mg per kg)




Simulations based on a pediatric population pharmacokinetic model indicate that approximately 60% of pediatric patients will achieve a target Busulfan Injection exposure (AUC) between 900 to 1350 µM•min with the first dose of Busulfan Injection using this dosing nomogram. Therapeutic drug monitoring and dose adjustment following the first dose of Busulfan Injection is recommended.

Dose Adjustment Based on Therapeutic Drug Monitoring

Instructions for measuring the AUC of busulfan at dose 1 (see
 
  Blood Sample Collection for AUC Determination) and the formula for adjustment of subsequent doses to achieve the desired target AUC (1125 µM•min), are provided below.

 
Adjusted dose (mg) = Actual Dose (mg) x Target AUC (µM•min)/Actual AUC (µM•min)
For example, if a patient received a dose of 11 mg busulfan and if the corresponding AUC measured was 800 µM•min, for a target AUC of 1125 µM•min, the target mg dose would be:
Mg dose =11 mg x 1125 µM•min /800 µM•min =15.5 mg
Busulfan Injection dose adjustment may be made using this formula and instructions below.

Blood Sample Collection for AUC Determination

Calculate the AUC (µM•min) based on blood samples collected at the following time points:
For dose 1:2 hr (end of infusion), 4 hr and 6 hr (immediately prior to the next scheduled Busulfan Injection administration).
 
  Actual sampling times should be recorded.

For doses other than dose 1: Pre-infusion (baseline), 2 hr (end of infusion), 4 hr and 6 hr (immediately prior to the next scheduled Busulfan Injection administration).

AUC calculations based on fewer than the three specified samples may result in inaccurate AUC determinations.

For each scheduled blood sample, collect one to three mL of blood into heparinized (Na or Li heparin) Vacutainer® tubes. The blood samples should be placed on wet ice immediately after collection and should be centrifuged (at 4°C) within one hour. The plasma, harvested into appropriate cryovial storage tubes, is to be frozen immediately at -20°C. All plasma samples are to be sent in a frozen state (i.e., on dry ice) to the assay laboratory for the determination of plasma busulfan concentrations.

Calculation of AUC

Busulfan Injection AUC calculations may be made using the following instructions and appropriate standard pharmacokinetic formula:

Dose 1 AUC
  
   infinityCalculation: AUC
  
   infinity= AUC
  
   0-6hr+AUC
  
   extrapolated, where AUC
  
   0-6hris to be estimated using the linear trapezoidal rule and AUC extrapolated can be computed by taking the ratio of the busulfan concentration at Hour 6 and the terminal elimination rate constant, λ
  
   z. The λ
  
   zmust be calculated from the terminal elimination phase of the busulfan concentration vs. time curve. A “0” pre-dose busulfan concentration should be assumed, and used in the calculation of AUC.
 
  

If the AUC is assessed subsequent to Dose 1, steady-state AUC
 
  ss(AUC
 
  0-6hr) is to be estimated from the trough, 2 hr, 4 hr and 6 hr concentrations using the linear trapezoidal rule

 

Instructions for Drug Administration and Blood Sample Collection for Therapeutic Drug Monitoring

Use an administration set with minimal residual hold up (priming) volume (1 to 3 mL) for drug infusion to ensure accurate delivery of the entire prescribed dose and to ensure accurate collection of blood samples for therapeutic drug monitoring and dose adjustment.
Prime the administration set tubing with drug solution to allow accurate documentation of the start time of Busulfan Injection infusion. Collect the blood sample from a peripheral IV line to avoid contamination with infusing drug. If the blood sample is taken directly from the existing central venous catheter (CVC),
 
  
DO NOT COLLECT THE BLOOD SAMPLE WHILE THE DRUG IS INFUSING
to ensure that the end of infusion sample is not contaminated with any residual drug. At the end of infusion (2 hr), disconnect the administration tubing and flush the CVC line with 5 mL of normal saline prior to the collection of the end of infusion sample from the CVC port. Collect the blood samples from a different port than that used for the Busulfan Injection infusion. When recording the Busulfan Injection infusion stop time, do not include the time required to flush the indwelling catheter line. Discard the administration tubing at the end of the two-hour infusion
 
  [see
  
   
Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
  
   










8.5 Geriatric Use

Clinical studies of Busulfan Injection did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects.
10 OVERDOSAGE

There is no known antidote to Busulfan Injection other than hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation. In the absence of hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation, the recommended dosage for Busulfan Injection would constitute an overdose of busulfan. The principal toxic effect is profound bone marrow hypoplasia/aplasia and pancytopenia, but the central nervous system, liver, lungs, and gastrointestinal tract may be affected. Monitor hematologic status closely and institute vigorous supportive measures as medically indicated. Survival after a single 140 mg dose of Myleran® Tablets in an 18 kg, 4-year old child has been reported. Inadvertent administration of a greater than normal dose of oral busulfan (2.1 mg per kg; total dose of 23.3 mg per kg) occurred in a 2-year old child prior to a scheduled bone marrow transplant without sequelae. An acute dose of 2.4 g was fatal in a 10-year old boy. There is one report that busulfan is dialyzable, thus dialysis should be considered in the case of overdose.