6 ADVERSE REACTIONS

The following adverse reactions are discussed in greater detail in other sections: 

Pancreatitis [see Boxed Warning, Warnings and Precautions (5.1)] 
Lactic acidosis/severe hepatomegaly with steatosis [see Boxed Warning, Warnings and Precautions (5.2)] 
Hepatic toxicity [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)]
Non-cirrhotic portal hypertension [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]
Peripheral neuropathy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)]
Retinal changes and optic neuritis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)] 







In adults, the most common adverse reactions (greater than 10%, all grades) are diarrhea, peripheral neurologic symptoms/neuropathy, nausea, headache, rash and vomiting. (6.1)
Adverse reactions in pediatric patients were consistent with those in adults. (6.1)



To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact TEVA USA, PHARMACOVIGILANCE at tel: 1-888-838-2872, X6351 or drug.safety@tevapharm.com; or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch









6.1 Clinical Trials Experience 

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice. 

Adults 

Study AI454-152 was a 48-week, randomized, open-label study comparing didanosine delayed-release capsules (400 mg once daily) plus stavudine (40 mg twice daily) plus nelfinavir (750 mg three times daily) to zidovudine (300 mg) plus lamivudine (150 mg) combination tablets twice daily plus nelfinavir (750 mg three times daily) in 511 treatment-naive patients. Selected clinical adverse reactions that occurred in combination with other antiretroviral agents are provided in Table 3. 

Table 3: Selected Clinical Adverse Reactions, Study AI454-152
                           







Percent of Patients,
                                    




Adverse Reactions


didanosine delayed-release capsules +stavudine +nelfinavirn = 258


zidovudine/lamivudine+nelfinavirn = 253



Diarrhea
57
58


Peripheral Neurologic Symptoms/Neuropathy 
25
11


Nausea
24
36


Headache
22
17


Rash
14
12


Vomiting
14
19


Pancreatitis (see below)
less than 1




In clinical trials using a buffered formulation of didanosine, pancreatitis resulting in death was observed in one patient who received didanosine plus stavudine plus nelfinavir, one patient who received didanosine plus stavudine plus indinavir, and 2 of 68 patients who received didanosine delayed-release capsules plus stavudine plus indinavir plus hydroxyurea. In an early access program, pancreatitis resulting in death was observed in one patient who received didanosine plus stavudine plus hydroxyurea plus ritonavir plus indinavir plus efavirenz [see Warnings and Precautions (5)]. 
The frequency of pancreatitis is dose related. In phase 3 studies with buffered formulations of didanosine, incidence ranged from 1% to 10% with doses higher than are currently recommended and 1% to 7% with recommended dose. 
Selected laboratory abnormalities that occurred in a study of didanosine delayed-release capsules in combination with other antiretroviral agents are shown in Table 4. 

Table 4: Selected Laboratory Abnormalities, Study AI454-152
                           










Percent of Patients
                                    





didanosine delayed-release capsules + stavudine + nelfinavirn = 258


zidovudine/lamivudine + nelfinavirn = 253




Parameter


Grades 3 to 4Greater than 5 x ULN for SGOT and SGPT, at least 2.1 x ULN for lipase, and at least 2.6 x ULN for bilirubin (ULN = upper limit of normal).



All Grades


Grades 3 to 4



All Grades



SGOT (AST)
5
46
5
19


SGPT (ALT)
6
44
5
22


Lipase
5
23
2
13


Bilirubin
less than 1
9
less than 1
3




Pediatric Patients

In clinical trials, 743 pediatric patients between 2 weeks and 18 years of age have been treated with didanosine. Adverse reactions and laboratory abnormalities reported to occur in these patients were generally consistent with the safety profile of didanosine in adults.
In pediatric phase 1 studies, pancreatitis occurred in 2 of 60 (3%) patients treated at entry doses below 300 mg/m2/day and in 5 of 38 (13%) patients treated at higher doses. In study ACTG 152, pancreatitis occurred in none of the 281 pediatric patients who received didanosine 120 mg/m2 every 12 hours and in less than 1% of the 274 pediatric patients who received didanosine 90 mg/m2 every 12 hours in combination with zidovudine [see Clinical Studies (14)].

Retinal changes and optic neuritis have been reported in pediatric patients.








6.2 Postmarketing Experience

The following adverse reactions have been identified during postapproval use of didanosine. Because they are reported voluntarily from a population of unknown size, estimates of frequency cannot be made. These reactions have been chosen for inclusion due to their seriousness, frequency of reporting, causal connection to didanosine, or a combination of these factors. 

Blood and Lymphatic System Disorders - anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia.

Body as a Whole - abdominal pain, alopecia, anaphylactoid reaction, asthenia, chills/fever, pain, and redistribution/accumulation of body fat [see Warnings and 
Precautions (5.8)
  ].

Digestive Disorders - anorexia, dyspepsia, and flatulence.

Exocrine Gland Disorders - pancreatitis (including fatal cases) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)], sialoadenitis, parotid gland enlargement, dry mouth, and dry eyes.

Hepatobiliary Disorders - symptomatic hyperlactatemia/lactic acidosis and hepatic steatosis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]; non-cirrhotic portal hypertension [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]; hepatitis and liver failure. 

Metabolic Disorders - diabetes mellitus, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase level, elevated serum amylase level, elevated serum gamma-glutamyltransferase level, elevated serum uric acid level, hypoglycemia, and hyperglycemia. 

Musculoskeletal Disorders - myalgia (with or without increases in creatine kinase), rhabdomyolysis including acute renal failure and hemodialysis, arthralgia, and myopathy. 

Ophthalmologic Disorders - retinal depigmentation and optic neuritis [see Warnings and 
Precautions (5.6)]. 

Use with Stavudine- and Hydroxyurea-Based Regimens 

When didanosine is used in combination with other agents with similar toxicities, the incidence of these toxicities may be higher than when didanosine is used alone. Thus, patients treated with didanosine delayed-release capsules in combination with stavudine, with or without hydroxyurea, may be at increased risk for pancreatitis and hepatotoxicity, which may be fatal, and severe peripheral neuropathy [see Warnings and Precautions (5)]. The combination of didanosine delayed-release capsules and hydroxyurea, with or without stavudine, should be avoided.
WARNING: PANCREATITIS, LACTIC ACIDOSIS and HEPATOMEGALY with STEATOSIS


Fatal and nonfatal pancreatitis has occurred during therapy with didanosine used alone or in combination regimens in both treatment-naive and treatment-experienced patients, regardless of degree of immunosuppression. Didanosine delayed-release capsules should be suspended in patients with suspected pancreatitis and discontinued in patients with confirmed pancreatitis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].



Lactic acidosis and severe hepatomegaly with steatosis, including fatal cases, have been reported with the use of nucleoside analogues alone or in combination, including didanosine and other antiretrovirals. Fatal lactic acidosis has been reported in pregnant women who received the combination of didanosine and stavudine with other antiretroviral agents. The combination of didanosine and stavudine should be used with caution during pregnancy and is recommended only if the potential benefit clearly outweighs the potential risk [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].







WARNING: PANCREATITIS, LACTIC ACIDOSIS and HEPATOMEGALY with STEATOSIS

See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning. 



Fatal and nonfatal pancreatitis. Didanosine delayed-release capsules should be suspended in patients with suspected pancreatitis and discontinued in patients with confirmed pancreatitis.
(5.1)



Lactic acidosis and severe hepatomegaly with steatosis, including fatal cases. Fatal lactic acidosis has been reported in pregnant women who received the combination of didanosine and stavudine.

 (5.2)
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS





Pancreatitis: Suspension or discontinuation of didanosine may be necessary. (5.1)
Lactic acidosis and severe hepatomegaly with steatosis: Suspend didanosine in patients who develop clinical symptoms or signs with or without laboratory findings. (5.2)
Hepatic toxicity: Interruption or discontinuation of didanosine must be considered upon worsening of liver disease. (5.3)
Non-cirrhotic portal hypertension: Discontinue didanosine in patients with evidence of non-cirrhotic portal hypertension. (5.4)
Patients may develop peripheral neuropathy (5.5), retinal changes and optic neuritis (5.6), immune reconstitution syndrome (5.7), and redistribution/accumulation of body fat (5.8)








5.1 Pancreatitis 


Fatal and nonfatal pancreatitis has occurred during therapy with didanosine used alone or in combination regimens in both treatment-naive and treatment-experienced patients, regardless of degree of immunosuppression. Didanosine delayed-release capsules should be suspended in patients with signs or symptoms of pancreatitis and discontinued in patients with confirmed pancreatitis. Patients treated with didanosine delayed-release capsules in combination with stavudine may be at increased risk for pancreatitis.

When treatment with life-sustaining drugs known to cause pancreatic toxicity is required, suspension of didanosine delayed-release capsules therapy is recommended. In patients with risk factors for pancreatitis, didanosine delayed-release capsules should be used with extreme caution and only if clearly indicated. Patients with advanced HIV-1 infection, especially the elderly, are at increased risk of pancreatitis and should be followed closely. Patients with renal impairment may be at greater risk for pancreatitis if treated without dose adjustment. The frequency of pancreatitis is dose related [see Adverse Reactions (6)].








5.2 Lactic Acidosis/Severe Hepatomegaly with Steatosis 


Lactic acidosis and severe hepatomegaly with steatosis, including fatal cases, have been reported with the use of nucleoside analogues alone or in combination, including didanosine and other antiretrovirals. A majority of these cases have been in women. Obesity and prolonged nucleoside exposure may be risk factors. Fatal lactic acidosis has been reported in pregnant women who received the combination of didanosine and stavudine with other antiretroviral agents. The combination of didanosine and stavudine should be used with caution during pregnancy and is recommended only if the potential benefit clearly outweighs the potential risk [see Use in Specific Populations (8.1)]. Particular caution should be exercised when administering didanosine delayed-release capsules to any patient with known risk factors for liver disease; however, cases have also been reported in patients with no known risk factors. Treatment with didanosine delayed-release capsules should be suspended in any patient who develops clinical signs or symptoms with or without laboratory findings consistent with symptomatic hyperlactatemia, lactic acidosis, or pronounced hepatotoxicity (which may include hepatomegaly and steatosis even in the absence of marked transaminase elevations). 








5.3 Hepatic Toxicity

The safety and efficacy of didanosine delayed-release capsules have not been established in HIV-infected patients with significant underlying liver disease. During combination antiretroviral therapy, patients with preexisting liver dysfunction, including chronic active hepatitis, have an increased frequency of liver function abnormalities, including severe and potentially fatal hepatic adverse events, and should be monitored according to standard practice. If there is evidence of worsening liver disease in such patients, interruption or discontinuation of treatment must be considered. 
Hepatotoxicity and hepatic failure resulting in death were reported during postmarketing surveillance in HIV-infected patients treated with hydroxyurea and other antiretroviral agents. Fatal hepatic events were reported most often in patients treated with the combination of hydroxyurea, didanosine, and stavudine. This combination should be avoided [see Adverse Reactions (6)].








5.4 Non-cirrhotic Portal Hypertension 

Postmarketing cases of non-cirrhotic portal hypertension have been reported, including cases leading to liver transplantation or death. Cases of didanosine-associated non-cirrhotic portal hypertension were confirmed by liver biopsy in patients with no evidence of viral hepatitis. Onset of signs and symptoms ranged from months to years after start of didanosine therapy. Common presenting features included elevated liver enzymes, esophageal varices, hematemesis, ascites, and splenomegaly. 
Patients receiving didanosine delayed-release capsules should be monitored for early signs of portal hypertension (eg, thrombocytopenia and splenomegaly) during routine medical visits. Appropriate laboratory testing including liver enzymes, serum bilirubin, albumin, complete blood count, and international normalized ratio (INR) and ultrasonography should be considered. Didanosine delayed-release capsules should be discontinued in patients with evidence of non-cirrhotic portal hypertension.








5.5 Peripheral Neuropathy

Peripheral neuropathy, manifested by numbness, tingling, or pain in the hands or feet, has been reported in patients receiving didanosine therapy. Peripheral neuropathy has occurred more frequently in patients with advanced HIV disease, in patients with a history of neuropathy, or in patients being treated with neurotoxic drug therapy, including stavudine. Discontinuation of didanosine delayed-release capsules should be considered in patients who develop peripheral neuropathy [see Adverse
Reactions (6)].








5.6 Retinal Changes and Optic Neuritis  

Retinal changes and optic neuritis have been reported in patients taking didanosine. Periodic retinal examinations should be considered for patients receiving didanosine delayed-release capsules [see Adverse 
Reactions (6)].








5.7 Immune Reconstitution Syndrome 

Immune reconstitution syndrome has been reported in patients treated with combination antiretroviral therapy, including didanosine delayed-release capsules. During the initial phase of combination antiretroviral treatment, patients whose immune system responds may develop an inflammatory response to indolent or residual opportunistic infections (such as Mycobacterium avium  infection, cytomegalovirus, Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia [PCP], or tuberculosis), which may necessitate further evaluation and treatment. 
Autoimmune disorders (such as Graves’ disease, polymyositis, and Guillain-Barré syndrome) have also been reported to occur in the setting of immune reconstitution; however, the time to onset is more variable, and can occur many months after initiation of treatment.








5.8 Fat Redistribution  

Redistribution/accumulation of body fat including central obesity, dorsocervical fat enlargement (buffalo hump), peripheral wasting, facial wasting, breast enlargement, and “cushingoid appearance” have been observed in patients receiving antiretroviral therapy. The mechanism and long-term consequences of these events are currently unknown. A causal relationship has not been established.
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS




Pregnancy: Fatal lactic acidosis has been reported in pregnant women who received both didanosine and stavudine with other agents. This combination should be used with caution during pregnancy and only if the potential benefit clearly outweighs the potential risk. (5.2, 8.1) Physicians are encouraged to register patients in the Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry by calling 1-800-258-4263.







8.1 Pregnancy


Pregnancy Category B 

Reproduction studies have been performed in rats and rabbits at doses up to 12 and 14.2 times the estimated human exposure (based upon plasma levels), respectively, and have revealed no evidence of impaired fertility or harm to the fetus due to didanosine. At approximately 12 times the estimated human exposure, didanosine was slightly toxic to female rats and their pups during mid and late lactation. These rats showed reduced food intake and body weight gains but the physical and functional development of the offspring was not impaired and there were no major changes in the F2 generation. A study in rats showed that didanosine and/or its metabolites are transferred to the fetus through the placenta. Animal reproduction studies are not always predictive of human response. 
There are no adequate and well-controlled studies of didanosine in pregnant women. Didanosine should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk.
Fatal lactic acidosis has been reported in pregnant women who received the combination of didanosine and stavudine with other antiretroviral agents. It is unclear if pregnancy augments the risk of lactic acidosis/hepatic steatosis syndrome reported in nonpregnant individuals receiving nucleoside analogues [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]. The combination of didanosine and stavudine should be used with caution during pregnancy and is recommended only if the potential benefit clearly outweighs the potential risk. Healthcare providers caring for HIV-infected pregnant women receiving didanosine should be alert for early diagnosis of lactic acidosis/hepatic steatosis syndrome. 

Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry 

To monitor maternal-fetal outcomes of pregnant women exposed to didanosine and other antiretroviral agents, an Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry has been established. Physicians are encouraged to register patients by calling 1-800-258-4263.








8.3 Nursing Mothers


The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend that HIV-infected mothers not breast-feed their infants to avoid risking postnatal transmission of HIV. A study in rats showed that following oral administration, didanosine and/or its metabolites were excreted into the milk of lactating rats. It is not known if didanosine is excreted in human milk. Because of both the potential for HIV transmission and the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants, mothers should be instructed not to breast-feed if they are receiving didanosine. 








8.4 Pediatric Use

Use of didanosine in pediatric patients from 2 weeks of age through adolescence is supported by evidence from adequate and well-controlled studies of didanosine in adult and pediatric patients [see Dosage and Administration (2), Adverse Reactions (6.1), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3), and Clinical Studies (14)]. Additional pharmacokinetic studies in pediatric patients support use of didanosine delayed-release capsules in pediatric patients who weigh at least 20 kg.








8.5 Geriatric Use

In an Expanded Access Program using a buffered formulation of didanosine for the treatment of advanced HIV infection, patients aged 65 years and older had a higher frequency of pancreatitis (10%) than younger patients (5%) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]. Clinical studies of didanosine, including those for didanosine delayed-release capsules, did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 years and over to determine whether they respond differently than younger subjects. Didanosine is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of toxic reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection. In addition, renal function should be monitored and dosage adjustments should be made accordingly [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)]. 








8.6 Renal Impairment 

Patients with renal impairment (creatinine clearance of less than 60 mL/min) may be at greater risk of toxicity from didanosine due to decreased drug clearance [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. A dose reduction is recommended for these patients [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
10 OVERDOSAGE

There is no known antidote for didanosine overdosage. In phase 1 studies, in which buffered formulations of didanosine were initially administered at doses ten times the currently recommended dose, toxicities included: pancreatitis, peripheral neuropathy, diarrhea, hyperuricemia, and hepatic dysfunction. Didanosine is not dialyzable by peritoneal dialysis, although there is some clearance by hemodialysis [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].