ADVERSE REACTIONS





Stage B2-C Prostatic Carcinoma

Treatment with Eulexin™ capsules and the goserelin acetate implant did not add substantially to the toxicity of radiation treatment alone. The following adverse experiences were reported during a multicenter clinical trial comparing Eulexin™ + goserelin acetate implant + radiation versus radiation alone. The most frequently reported (greater than 5%) adverse experiences are listed below:

Adverse Events During Acute Radiation Therapy (within first 90 days of radiation therapy)







(n=231) Goserelin Acetate Implant + Eulexin™+ Radiation


(n=235) Radiation Only




% All
% All




Rectum/Large Bowel
80
76


Bladder
58
60


Skin
37
37




Adverse Events During Late Radiation Phase (after 90 days of radiation therapy)







(n=231) Goserelin Acetate Implant + Eulexin™+ Radiation


(n=235) Radiation Only




% All
% All




Diarrhea
36
40


Cystitis
16
16


Rectal Bleeding
14
20


Proctitis
8
8


Hematuria
7
12



Additional adverse event data were collected for the combination therapy with radiation group over both the hormonal treatment and hormonal treatment plus radiation phases of the study. Adverse experiences occurring in more than 5% of patients in this group, over both parts of the study, were hot flashes (46%), diarrhea (40%), nausea (9%), and skin rash (8%).








Stage D2 Metastatic Carcinoma

The following adverse experiences were reported during a multicenter clinical trial comparing Eulexin™ + LHRH agonist versus placebo + LHRH agonist.
The most frequently reported (greater than 5%) adverse experiences during treatment with Eulexin™ capsules in combination with an LHRH agonist are listed in the table below. For comparison, adverse experiences seen with an LHRH agonist and placebo are also listed in the following table.








(n=294) Eulexin™+ LHRH agonist


(n=28) Placebo + LHRH agonist




% All
% All




Hot Flashes
61
57


Loss of Libido
36
31


Impotence
33
29


Diarrhea
12
4


Nausea/Vomiting
11
10


Gynecomastia
9
11


Other
7
9


Other GI
6
4



As shown in the table, for both treatment groups, the most frequently occurring adverse experiences (hot flashes, impotence, loss of libido) were those known to be associated with low serum androgen levels and known to occur with LHRH agonists alone.
The only notable difference was the higher incidence of diarrhea in the Eulexin™ + LHRH agonist group (12%), which was severe in 5% as opposed to the placebo + LHRH agonist (4%), which was severe in less than 1%.
In addition, the following adverse reactions were reported during treatment with Eulexin™ + LHRH agonist.

Cardiovascular System: hypertension in 1% of patients.

Central Nervous System: CNS (drowsiness/confusion/depression/anxiety/nervousness) reactions occurred in 1% of patients.

Gastrointestinal System: anorexia 4%, and other GI disorders occurred in 6% of patients.

Hematopoietic System: anemia occurred in 6%, leukopenia in 3%, and thrombocytopenia in 1% of patients.

Liver and Biliary System: hepatitis and jaundice in less than 1% of patients.

Skin: irritation at the injection site and rash occurred in 3% of patients.

Other: edema occurred in 4%, genitourinary and neuromuscular symptoms in 2%, and pulmonary symptoms in less than 1% of patients.
In addition, the following spontaneous adverse experiences have been reported during the marketing of Eulexin™: hemolytic anemia,macrocytic anemia,methemoglobinemia, sulfhemoglobinemia, photosensitivity reactions (including erythema, ulceration, bullous eruptions, and epidermal necrolysis) and urine discoloration. The urine was noted to change to an amber or yellow-green appearance which can be attributed to the Eulexin™ and/or its metabolites. Also reported were cholestatic jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy, and hepatic necrosis. The hepatic conditions were often reversible after discontinuing therapy; however, there have been reports of death following severe hepatic injury associated with use of Eulexin™.
Malignant breast neoplasms have occurred rarely in male patients being treated with Eulexin™ capsules.






Abnormal Laboratory Test Values

Laboratory abnormalities including elevated SGOT, SGPT, bilirubin values, SGGT, BUN, and serum creatinine have been reported.
WARNINGS






Hepatic Injury

There have been postmarketing reports of hospitalization and rarely death due to liver failure in patients taking Eulexin™. Evidence of hepatic injury included elevated serum transaminase levels, jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy and death related to acute hepatic failure. The hepatic injury was reversible after discontinuation of therapy in some patients. Approximately half of the reported cases occurred within the initial 3 months of treatment with Eulexin™.
Serum transaminase levels should be measured prior to starting treatment with Eulexin™. Eulexin™ is not recommended in patients whose ALT values exceed twice the upper limit of normal. Serum transaminase levels should then be measured monthly for the first 4 months of therapy, and periodically thereafter. Liver function tests also should be obtained at the first signs and symptoms suggestive of liver dysfunction, e.g., nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, fatigue, anorexia, "flu-like" symptoms, hyperbilirubinuria, jaundice or right upper quadrant tenderness. If at any time, a patient has jaundice, or their ALT rises above 2 times the upper limit of normal, Eulexin™ should be immediately discontinued with close follow-up of liver function tests until resolution.
WARNINGS





Hepatic Injury


SEE BOXED WARNINGS










Use in Women

Eulexin™ capsules are for use only in men. This product has no indication for women and should not be used in this population, particularly for nonserious or nonlife-threatening conditions.








Fetal toxicity

Eulexin™ may cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman (see 
Pregnancy
).








Aniline toxicity

One metabolite of Eulexin™ is 4-nitro-3-fluoro-methylaniline. Several toxicities consistent with aniline exposure, including methemoglobinemia, hemolytic anemia and cholestatic jaundice have been observed in both animals and humans after Eulexin™ administration. In patients susceptible to aniline toxicity (e.g. persons with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, hemoglobin M disease and smokers), monitoring of methemoglobin levels should be considered.
PRECAUTIONS





General

In clinical trials, gynecomastia occurred in 9% of patients receiving Eulexin™ together with medical castration.








Information for Patients

Patients should be informed that Eulexin™ capsules and the drug used for medical castration should be administered concomitantly, and that they should not interrupt their dosing or stop taking these medications without consulting their physician.








Laboratory Tests

Regular assessment of serum Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) may be helpful in monitoring the patient's response. If PSA levels rise significantly and consistently during Eulexin™ therapy the patient should be evaluated for clinical progression. For patients who have objective progression of disease together with an elevated PSA, a treatment period free of antiandrogen while continuing the LHRH analogue may be considered.








Drug Interactions

Increases in prothrombin time have been noted in patients receiving long-term warfarin therapy after Eulexin™ was initiated. Therefore close monitoring of prothrombin time is recommended and adjustment of the anticoagulant dose may be necessary when Eulexin™ capsules are administered concomitantly with warfarin.








Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis and Impairment of Fertility

In a 1 year dietary study in male rats, interstitial cell adenomas of the testes were present in 49% to 75% of all treated rats (daily doses of 10, 30, and 50 mg/kg/ day were administered). These produced plasma Cmax values that are 1, 2, 3, and 4 fold respectively, those associated with therapeutic doses in humans. In male rats similarly dosed for 1 year, tumors were still present after 1 year of a drug-free period, but the incidences were 43% to 47%. In a 2 year carcinogenicity study in male rats, daily administration of Eulexin™ at these same doses produced testicular interstitial cell adenomas in 91% to 95% of all treated rats as opposed to 11% of untreated control rats. Mammary adenomas, adenocarcinomas, and fibroadenomas were increased in treated male rats at exposure levels that were 1 to 4 fold those observed during therapeutic dosing in humans. There are likewise reports of malignant breast neoplasms in men treated with Eulexin™ capsules (see 
ADVERSE REACTIONS
 section).
Eulexin™ did not demonstrate DNA modifying activity in the Ames Salmonella/ microsome Mutagenesis Assay. Dominant lethal tests in rats were negative. Reduced sperm counts were observed during a 6 week study of Eulexin™ mono-therapy in normal human volunteers.
Eulexin™ did not affect estrous cycles or interfere with the mating behavior of male and female rats when the drug was administered at 25 and 75 mg/kg/day prior to mating. Males treated with 150 mg/kg/day (30 times the minimum effective antiandrogenic dose) failed to mate; mating behavior returned to normal after dosing was stopped. Conception rates were decreased in all dosing groups. Suppression of spermatogenesis was observed in rats dosed for 52 weeks at approximately 3, 8, or 17 times the human dose and in dogs dosed for 78 weeks at 1.4, 2.3, and 3.7 times the human dose.








Animal Toxicology

Serious cardiac lesions were observed in 2/10 beagle dogs receiving 25 mg/kg/ day for 78 weeks and 3/16 receiving 40 mg/kg/day for 2 to 4 years. These lesions, indicative of chronic injury and repair processes, included chronic myxomatous degeneration, intra-atrial fibrosis, myocardial acidophilic degeneration, vasculitis and perivasculitis. The doses at which these lesions occurred were associated with 2-hydroxyflutamide levels that were 1 to 12 fold greater than those observed in humans at therapeutic levels.








Pregnancy





Pregnancy Category D

There was decreased 24 hour survival in the offspring of pregnant rats treated with Eulexin™ at doses of 30, 100 or 200 mg/kg/day (approximately 3, 9 and 19 times the human dose). A slight increase in minor variations in the development of the sternebrae and vertebrae was seen in fetuses of rats treated with two higher doses. Feminization of the male rats also occurred at the two higher dose levels. There was a decreased survival rate in the offspring of rabbits receiving the highest dose (15 mg/kg/day, equal to 1.4 times the human dose).
OVERDOSAGE

In animal studies with Eulexin™ alone, signs of overdose included hypoactivity, piloerection, slow respiration, ataxia, and/or lacrimation, anorexia, tranquilization, emesis, and methemoglobinemia.
Clinical trials have been conducted with Eulexin™ in doses up to 1500 mg per day for periods up to 36 weeks with no serious adverse effects reported. Those adverse reactions reported included gynecomastia, breast tenderness, and some increases in SGOT. The single dose of Eulexin™ ordinarily associated with symptoms of overdose or considered to be life-threatening has not been established.
Eulexin™ is highly protein bound, and is not cleared by hemodialysis. As in the management of overdosage with any drug, it should be borne in mind that multiple agents may have been taken. If vomiting does not occur spontaneously, it should be induced if the patient is alert. General supportive care, including frequent monitoring of the vital signs and close observation of the patient, is indicated.