6 ADVERSE REACTIONS




The most common adverse reactions are:


Infants with Rapidly Progressive LAL Deficiency Presenting within the First 6 Months of Life (≥30%): diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rhinitis, anemia, cough, nasopharyngitis, and urticaria. (6.1)

Pediatric and Adult Patients with LAL Deficiency  (≥8%): headache, fever, oropharyngeal pain, nasopharyngitis, asthenia, constipation, and nausea. (6.1)



To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Alexion at 1-844-259-6783 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch









6.1 Clinical Trials Experience

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in clinical practice.
In clinical trials, a total of 106 patients received treatment with KANUMA. The data described below reflect exposure to KANUMA in 75 patients who received KANUMA at dosages up to 3 mg/kg once weekly in clinical trials:

Nine patients (5 males, 4 females) who had growth failure or other evidence of rapidly progressive LAL deficiency presenting within the first 6 months of life received KANUMA for up to 165 weeks (median 60 weeks) at escalating doses ranging between 0.35 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg once weekly [see Clinical Studies (14.1)].
66 pediatric and adult patients with LAL deficiency aged 4 to 58 years (33 males, 33 females) received KANUMA 1 mg/kg every other week for up to 36 weeks.

Table 2 summarizes the most common adverse reactions occurring in >30% of patients with rapidly progressive LAL deficiency presenting within the first 6 months of life receiving KANUMA in Study 1.

Table 2:  Adverse Reactions in ≥30% of Infants with Rapidly Progressive LAL Deficiency Presenting within the First 6 Months of Life Receiving KANUMA




Adverse Reactions
KANUMAN=9


n (%)




Diarrhea
6 (67)


Vomiting
6 (67)


Fever
5 (56)


Rhinitis
5 (56)


Anemia
4 (44)


Cough
3 (33)


Nasopharyngitis
3 (33)


Urticaria
3 (33)



Other less common adverse reactions reported in patients with rapidly progressive disease presenting within the first 6 months of life who received KANUMA included hypotonia, decreased oxygen saturation, retching, sneezing, and tachycardia.
For infant patients within Study 1 and Study 3 (n = 19), the following additional adverse reactions were reported in ≥ 30% of infants who received Kanuma since the time of marketing authorization, including patients who received an escalated dose to 5 mg/kg qw: hypersensitivity, respiratory distress, and tachycardia.
Table 3 summarizes the most common adverse reactions that occurred in ≥8% of pediatric and adult patients with LAL deficiency receiving KANUMA in Study 2.

Table 3:  Adverse Reactions in ≥8% of Pediatric and Adult Patients with LAL Deficiency Receiving KANUMA





Adverse Reactions
KANUMAN = 36
PlaceboN = 30


n (%)
n (%)




Headache
10 (28)
6 (20)


Fever
9 (25)
7 (23)


Oropharyngeal pain
6 (17)
1 (3)


Nasopharyngitis
4 (11)
3 (10)


Asthenia
3 (8)
1 (3)


Constipation
3 (8)
1 (3)


Nausea
3 (8)
2 (7)



Other less common adverse reactions reported in pediatric and adult patients who received KANUMA included anxiety and chest discomfort.
For pediatric and adult patients (n = 106), the following additional adverse reactions were reported in ≥ 8% of pediatric and adult patients who received Kanuma since the time of marketing authorization, including patients who received an escalated dose to 3 mg/kg qw: hypersensitivity, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and dizziness.








Hyperlipidemia

Increases in circulating LDL-cholesterol (LDL-c) and triglycerides above pre-treatment values were observed in 29 of 36 (81%) and 21 of 36 (58%) patients, respectively, at 2 and 4 weeks following initiation of KANUMA [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)]. The maximum mean percentage increase was 18% for LDL-c at Week 2 and 5% for triglycerides at Week 4.










6.2 Immunogenicity

As with all therapeutic proteins, there is potential for immunogenicity. The detection of antibody formation is highly dependent on the sensitivity and specificity of the assay and may be influenced by several factors including assay methodology, sample handling, timing of sample collection, concomitant medications, and underlying disease. For these reasons, comparison of the incidence of antibodies in the studies described below with the incidence of antibodies in other studies or to other sebelipase alfa products may be misleading.
Approximately 8% (9/106) of pediatric and adult patients with LAL deficiency developed antibodies to sebelipase alfa (anti-drug antibodies or ADA) following treatment with KANUMA across all clinical studies. Among the 9 patients who developed ADA, 2 patients were positive for neutralizing antibodies (NAb). Approximately 53% (10/19) of infants with rapidly progressive LAL deficiency developed ADA following treatment with KANUMA across all clinical studies. Among the 10 patients who developed ADA, 9 patients were positive for NAb.








Study 1: Patients with Rapidly Progressive LAL Deficiency Presenting within the First 6 Months of Life

Seven of the 9 infants with rapidly progressive disease had at least one post-treatment ADA assessment, and 4 of these 7 (57%) patients developed ADA during treatment with KANUMA. All of the 4 ADA-positive patients were determined to be positive for neutralizing antibodies that inhibit in vitro enzyme activity and/or cellular uptake of the enzyme. At the time of initial ADA positivity, 3 patients were receiving a dosage of 1 mg/kg once weekly and 1 patient was receiving a dosage of 3 mg/kg once weekly. Three of the 4 ADA-positive patients had ADA titers monitored from the initiation of treatment and developed measurable ADA titers within the first 2 months of exposure. Persistent ADA was observed in all 4 patients.
Hypersensitivity reactions occurred in all 4 of the ADA-positive patients, whereas they occurred in only 1 of the 3 ADA-negative patients. None of the patients discontinued treatment. In 1 patient, decreased growth velocity in a setting of neutralizing antibodies to KANUMA was observed.










Study 2: Pediatric and Adult Patients with LAL Deficiency

Five of 35 (14%) KANUMA-treated pediatric and adult patients who completed the 20-week double-blind period of study treatment developed ADA. All patients were receiving 1 mg/kg once every other week. All 5 ADA-positive patients first developed measurable ADA titers within the first 3 months of exposure. Two of the 5 ADA-positive patients had a measurable ADA titer at only one time point. In the 3 patients with measurable ADA titers at multiple time points, ADA titers decreased to undetectable levels during continued treatment. Two patients developed in vitro neutralizing antibodies during the open-label extension phase after 20 weeks and 52 weeks of treatment with KANUMA, respectively. There is no clear association between the development of ADA and decreased efficacy in pediatric and adult patients treated with KANUMA.
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS






Hypersensitivity Reactions including Anaphylaxis: Observe patients during and after the infusion. Consider interrupting the infusion or lowering the infusion rate, based on the severity of the reaction. If a severe hypersensitivity reaction occurs, immediately stop the infusion and initiate appropriate treatment. Pre-treatment with antipyretics and/or antihistamines may prevent subsequent reactions in those cases where symptomatic treatment is required. (5.1)

Hypersensitivity to Eggs or Egg Products: Consider the risks and benefits of treatment in patients with known systemic hypersensitivity reactions to eggs or egg products. (5.2)








5.1 Hypersensitivity Reactions Including Anaphylaxis


Hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylaxis, have been reported in KANUMA-treated patients, based on application of Sampson criteria to identify signs/symptoms consistent with anaphylaxis. In clinical trials, 3 (infants) of 106 (3%) patients treated with KANUMA experienced signs and symptoms consistent with anaphylaxis. These patients experienced reactions during infusion with signs and symptoms including chest discomfort, conjunctival injection, dyspnea, generalized and itchy rash, hyperemia, swelling of eyelids, rhinorrhea, severe respiratory distress, tachycardia, tachypnea, and urticaria. Anaphylaxis has occurred as early as the sixth infusion and as late as 1 year after treatment initiation.

In clinical trials, 21 of 106 (20%) KANUMA-treated patients, including 9 of 14 (64%) infants and 12 of 92 (13%) pediatric patients who were 4 years and older and adults, experienced signs and symptoms either consistent with or that may be related to a hypersensitivity reaction. Signs and symptoms of hypersensitivity reactions, occurring in two or more patients, included abdominal pain, agitation, fever, chills, diarrhea, eczema, edema, hypertension, irritability, laryngeal edema, nausea, pallor, pruritus, rash, and vomiting. The majority of reactions occurred during or within 4 hours of the completion of the infusion. Patients were not routinely pre-medicated prior to infusion of KANUMA in these clinical trials.
Due to the potential for anaphylaxis, appropriate medical support should be readily available when KANUMA is administered. If anaphylaxis occurs, immediately discontinue the infusion and initiate appropriate medical treatment. Observe patients closely during and after the infusion. Inform patients of the signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis and instruct them to seek immediate medical care should signs and symptoms occur.
The management of hypersensitivity reactions should be based on the severity of the reaction and may include temporarily interrupting the infusion, lowering the infusion rate, and/or treatment with antihistamines, antipyretics, and/or corticosteroids. If interrupted, the infusion may be resumed at a slower rate with increases as tolerated. Pre-treatment with antipyretics and/or antihistamines may prevent subsequent reactions in those cases where symptomatic treatment was required. If a severe hypersensitivity reaction occurs, immediately discontinue the infusion and initiate appropriate medical treatment.
Consider the risks and benefits of re-administering KANUMA following a severe reaction. Monitor patients, with appropriate resuscitation measures available, if the decision is made to re-administer the product.








5.2 Hypersensitivity to Eggs or Egg Products

KANUMA is produced in the egg whites of genetically engineered chickens. Patients with a known history of egg allergies were excluded from the clinical trials. Consider the risks and benefits of treatment with KANUMA in patients with known systemic hypersensitivity reactions to eggs or egg products.
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS





8.1 Pregnancy







Risk Summary

Available data with KANUMA use in pregnant women are insufficient to identify a drug-associated risk of major birth defects, miscarriage or other adverse maternal or fetal outcomes. Animal reproductive studies conducted with sebelipase alfa showed no evidence of embryolethality, fetotoxicity, teratogenicity, or abnormal early embryonic development at dosages up to 164 and 526 times the human dosage of 1 mg/kg every other week (based on AUC) in rats and rabbits, respectively.
The background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population is unknown. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2 to 4% and 15 to 20%, respectively.










Animal Data

Sebelipase alfa administered during the period of organogenesis to rats (on gestation days 6, 9, 12, 15 and 17) and rabbits (on gestation days 7, 10, 13, 16 and 19) at intravenous doses up to 60 and 50 mg/kg, respectively, (approximately 164 and 526 times the human AUC of 1387 ng.h/mL at 1 mg/kg dose administered once every other week, respectively) did not cause any adverse effects on embryofetal development. A pre- and post-natal development study in rats showed no evidence of adverse effects on pre- and postnatal development at intravenous doses (administered on gestation days 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, and 20 and days 4, 7, 10, 14, and 17 postpartum) of sebelipase alfa up to 60 mg/kg/day (approximately 164 times the human AUC of 1387 ng.h/mL at 1 mg/kg dose administered once every other week).










8.2 Lactation







Risk Summary

There are no data on the presence of sebelipase alfa in human milk, the effects on the breastfed infant, or the effects on milk production. It is not known if sebelipase alfa is present in animal milk. The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother's clinical need for KANUMA and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed infant from sebelipase alfa or from the underlying maternal condition.










8.4 Pediatric Use

Safety and effectiveness of KANUMA have been established in pediatric patients aged 1 month and older. Clinical trials with KANUMA were conducted in 56 pediatric patients (range 1 month to <18 years old) [see Clinical Studies (14)].








8.5 Geriatric Use

Clinical trials of KANUMA did not include any patients aged 65 years old and older. It is not known whether they respond differently than younger patients.