6 ADVERSE REACTIONS





  The most common adverse reactions (reported in ≥2% of adult and adolescent patients with allergic rhinitis and greater than placebo) were pharyngitis, dry mouth, myalgia, fatigue, somnolence, dysmenorrhea. (6.1)


To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Lupin Pharmaceuticals, Inc. at 1-800-399-2561 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.









The following adverse reactions are discussed in greater detail in other sections of the label: 

  Hypersensitivity reactions. [See WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.1).] 









6.1 Clinical Trials Experience

Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in clinical practice.


Adults and Adolescents
 


Allergic Rhinitis:


In multiple-dose placebo-controlled trials, 2834 patients ages 12 years or older received desloratadine tablets at doses of 2.5 mg to 20 mg daily, of whom 1655 patients received the recommended daily dose of 5 mg. In patients receiving 5 mg daily, the rate of adverse events was similar between desloratadine and placebo-treated patients. The percent of patients who withdrew prematurely due to adverse events was 2.4% in the desloratadine group and 2.6% in the placebo group. There were no serious adverse events in these trials in patients receiving desloratadine. All adverse events that were reported by greater than or equal to 2% of patients who received the recommended daily dose of desloratadine tablets (5 mg once daily), and that were more common with desloratadine tablets than placebo, are listed in Table 1.

Table 1 Incidence of Adverse Events Reported by ≥2% of Adult and Adolescent Allergic Rhinitis Patients Receiving Desloratadine Tablets






Adverse 
Event



Desloratadine 
Tablets
, 
5 
mg

(
n
=
1655
)



Placebo



(
n
=
1652
)





Infections 
and 
Infestations




     Pharyngitis

4.1%

2.0%




Nervous 
System 
Disorders




     Somnolence

2.1%

1.8%




Gastrointestinal 
Disorders




     Dry Mouth

3.0%

1.9%




Musculoskeletal 
and 
Connective 
Tissue 
Disorders




     Myalgia

2.1%

1.8%




Reproductive 
System 
and 
Breast 
Disorders




     Dysmenorrhea

2.1%

1.6%




General 
Disorders 
and 
Administration 
Site 
Conditions




     Fatigue

2.1%

1.2%




The frequency and magnitude of laboratory and electrocardiographic abnormalities were similar in desloratadine and placebo-treated patients. 
There were no differences in adverse events for subgroups of patients as defined by gender, age, or race. 


Pediatrics 


Two hundred and forty-six pediatric subjects 6 months to 11 years of age received desloratadine oral solution for 15 days in three placebo-controlled clinical trials. Pediatric subjects aged 6 to 11 years received 2.5 mg once a day, subjects aged 1 to 5 years received 1.25 mg once a day, and subjects 6 to 11 months of age received 1.0 mg once a day. 
In subjects 6 to 11 years of age, no individual adverse event was reported by 2 percent or more of the subjects. 
In subjects 2 to 5 years of age, adverse events reported for desloratadine and placebo in at least 2 percent of subjects receiving desloratadine oral solution and at a frequency greater than placebo were fever (5.5%, 5.4%), urinary tract infection (3.6%, 0%) and varicella (3.6%, 0%). 
In subjects 12 months to 23 months of age, adverse events reported for the desloratadine product and placebo in at least 2 percent of subjects receiving desloratadine oral solution and at a frequency greater than placebo were fever (16.9%, 12.9%), diarrhea (15.4%, 11.3%), upper respiratory tract infections (10.8%, 9.7%), coughing (10.8%, 6.5%), appetite increased (3.1%, 1.6%), emotional lability (3.1%, 0%), epistaxis (3.1%, 0%), parasitic infection (3.1%, 0%), pharyngitis (3.1%, 0%), rash maculopapular (3.1%, 0%). 
In subjects 6 months to 11 months of age, adverse events reported for desloratadine and placebo in at least 2 percent of subjects receiving desloratadine oral solution and at a frequency greater than placebo were upper respiratory tract infections (21.2%, 12.9%), diarrhea (19.7%, 8.1%), fever (12.1%, 1.6%), irritability (12.1%, 11.3%), coughing (10.6%, 9.7%), somnolence (9.1%, 8.1%), bronchitis (6.1%, 0%), otitis media (6.1%, 1.6%), vomiting (6.1%, 3.2%), anorexia (4.5%, 1.6%), pharyngitis (4.5%, 1.6%), insomnia (4.5%, 0%), rhinorrhea (4.5%, 3.2%), erythema (3.0%, 1.6%), and nausea (3.0%, 0%). 
There were no clinically meaningful changes in any electrocardiographic parameter, including the QTc interval. Only one of the 246 pediatric subjects receiving desloratadine oral solution in the clinical trials discontinued treatment because of an adverse event.







6.2 Post-Marketing Experience

Because adverse events are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure. The following spontaneous adverse events have been reported during the marketing of desloratadine: 

Cardiac disorders: tachycardia, palpitations 

Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders: dyspnea 

Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders: rash, pruritus 

Nervous system disorders: psychomotor hyperactivity, movement disorders (including dystonia, tics, and extrapyramidal symptoms), seizures (reported in patients with and without a known seizure disorder) 

Immune system disorders: hypersensitivity reactions (such as urticaria, edema and anaphylaxis) 

Investigations: elevated liver enzymes including bilirubin 

Hepatobiliary disorders: hepatitis 

Metabolism and nutrition disorders: increased appetite
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS





  Hypersensitivity reactions including rash, pruritus, urticaria, edema, dyspnea, and anaphylaxis have been reported. In such cases, stop desloratadine tablets at once and consider alternative treatments. (5.1)







5.1 Hypersensitivity Reactions

Hypersensitivity reactions including rash, pruritus, urticaria, edema, dyspnea, and anaphylaxis have been reported after administration of desloratadine. If such a reaction occurs, therapy with desloratadine should be stopped and alternative treatment should be considered. [See ADVERSE REACTIONS (6.2).]
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS




          Renal impairment: dosage adjustment is recommended (2.5, 8.6, 12.3)

Hepatic impairment: dosage adjustment is      recommended (2.5, 8.7, 12.3)








8.1 Pregnancy



Risk Summary 

The limited available data with desloratadine in pregnant women are not sufficient to inform a drug-associated risk for major birth defects and miscarriage. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Desloratadine given during organogenesis to pregnant rats was not teratogenic at the summed area under the concentration-time curve (AUC)-based exposures of desloratadine and its metabolite approximately 320 times that at the recommended human daily oral dose (RHD) of 5 mg/day. Desloratadine given during organogenesis to pregnant rabbits was not teratogenic at the AUC-based exposures of desloratadine approximately 230 times that at the RHD. Desloratadine given to pregnant rats during organogenesis through lactation resulted in reduced body weight and slow righting reflex of F1 pups at the summed AUC-based exposures of desloratadine and its metabolite approximately 70 times or greater than that at the RHD [see Data].
The estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated populations is unknown. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2 to 4% and 15 to 20%, respectively.


Data




Animal Data:


Desloratadine was given orally during organogenesis to pregnant rats at doses of 6, 24 and 48 mg/kg/day (approximately 50, 200 and 320 times the summed AUC-based exposure of desloratadine and its metabolite at the RHD). No fetal malformations were present. Reduced fetal weights and skeletal variations noted at doses of 24 and 48 mg/kg/day were likely secondary to the maternal toxicities of reduced body weight gain and food consumption observed at the same doses. Desloratadine was also given orally during organogenesis to pregnant rabbits at doses of 15, 30 and 60 mg/kg/day (approximately 30, 70 and 230 times the AUC- based exposure of desloratadine at the RHD). No adverse effects to the fetus were noted. Reduced maternal body weight gain was noted in rabbits at 60 mg/kg/day. In a peri- and post-natal development study, desloratadine was given to rats orally during the peri- natal (Gestation Day 6) through lactation periods (Postpartum Day 21) at doses of 3, 9 and 18 mg/kg/day. Reduced body weight and slow righting reflex were reported in F1 pups at doses of 9 mg/kg/day or greater (approximately 70 times or greater than the summed AUC-based exposure of desloratadine and its metabolite at the RHD). Desloratadine had no effect on F1 pup development at 3 mg/kg/day (approximately 10 times the summed AUC-based exposure of desloratadine and its metabolite at the RHD). Maternal toxicities including reduced body weight gain and food consumption were noted at 18 mg/kg/day for F0 dams. F1 offspring were subsequently mated and there was no developmental toxicity for F2 pups observed. 







8.2 Lactation



Risk Summary


Desloratadine passes into breast milk. There are not sufficient data on the effects of desloratadine on the breastfed infant or the effects of desloratadine on milk production. The decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue desloratadine, taking into account the developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding, the nursing mother's clinical need, and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed infant from desloratadine or from the underlying maternal condition.








8.3 Females and Males of Reproductive Potential



Infertility


There are no data available on human infertility associated with desloratadine.
There were no clinically relevant effects of desloratadine on female fertility in rats. A male specific decrease in fertility occurred at an oral desloratadine dose of 12 mg/kg or greater in rats (approximately 65 times the summed AUC-based exposure of desloratadine and its metabolite at the RHD). Male fertility was unaffected at a desloratadine dose of 3 mg/kg (approximately 10 times the summed AUC-based exposure of desloratadine and its metabolite at the RHD). [See NONCLINICAL TOXICOLOGY (13.1).]









8.4 Pediatric Use

The recommended dose of desloratadine oral solution in the pediatric population is based on cross-study comparison of the plasma concentration of desloratadine in adults and pediatric subjects. The safety of desloratadine oral solution has been established in 246 pediatric subjects aged 6 months to 11 years in three placebo-controlled clinical studies. Since the course of seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis and the effects of desloratadine are sufficiently similar in the pediatric and adult populations, it allows extrapolation from the adult efficacy data to pediatric patients. The effectiveness of desloratadine oral solution in these age groups is supported by evidence from adequate and well-controlled studies of desloratadine tablets in adults. The safety and effectiveness of desloratadine tablets or desloratadine oral solution have not been demonstrated in pediatric patients less than 6 months of age. [See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)]. 









8.5 Geriatric Use

Clinical studies of desloratadine did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects. Other reported clinical experience has not identified differences between the elderly and younger patients. In general, dose selection for an elderly patient should be cautious, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function, and of concomitant disease or other drug therapy. [See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].








8.6 Renal Impairment

Dosage adjustment for patients with renal impairment is recommended [see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION (2.5) and CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)]. 








8.7 Hepatic Impairment

Dosage adjustment for patients with hepatic impairment is recommended [see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION (2.5) and CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].
10 OVERDOSAGE






In the event of overdose, consider standard measures to remove any unabsorbed drug. Symptomatic and supportive treatment is recommended. Desloratadine and 3-hydroxydesloratadine are not eliminated by hemodialysis. 
Information regarding acute overdosage is limited to experience from post-marketing adverse event reports and from clinical trials conducted during the development of the desloratadine product. In a dose-ranging trial, at doses of 10 mg and 20 mg/day somnolence was reported. 
In another study, no clinically relevant adverse events were reported in normal male and female volunteers who were given single daily doses of desloratadine 45 mg for 10 days [See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.2)].