ADVERSE REACTIONS




Adverse reactions reported coincident with the administration of methocarbamol include:


Body as a whole:  Anaphylactic reaction, angioneurotic edema, fever, headache
Cardiovascular system:   Bradycardia, flushing, hypotension, syncope, thrombophlebitis
Digestive system:   Dyspepsia, jaundice (including cholestatic jaundice), nausea and vomiting
Hemic and lymphatic system:  Leukopenia
Immune system:    Hypersensitivity reactions
Nervous system:   Amnesia, confusion, diplopia, dizziness or lightheadedness, drowsiness, insomnia, mild muscular incoordination, nystagmus, sedation, seizures(including grand mal), vertigo
Skin and special senses: Blurred vision, conjunctivitis, nasal congestion, metallic taste, pruritus, rash, Urticaria
To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Granules USA, Inc. at 1-877-770-3183 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch
WARNINGS




Since methocarbamol may possess a general CNS depressant effect, patients receiving Methocarbamol tablets should be cautioned about combined effects with alcohol and other CNS depressants.


Safe use of Methocarbamol tablets has not been established with regard to possible adverse effects upon fetal development. There have been reports of fetal and congenital abnormalities following in utero exposure to methocarbamol. Therefore, Methocarbamol tablets should not be used in women who are or may become pregnant and particularly during early pregnancy unless in the judgment of the physician the potential benefits outweigh the possible hazards (see 
  
       
 
  
PRECAUTIONS, Pregnancy
 ).
 
      

 

Use in Activities Requiring Mental Alertness

Methocarbamol may impair mental and/or physical abilities required for performance of hazardous tasks, such as operating machinery or driving a motor vehicle. Patients should be cautioned about operating machinery, including automobiles, until they are reasonably certain that methocarbamol therapy does not adversely affect their ability to engage in such activities.
PRECAUTIONS







INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS


Patients should be cautioned that methocarbamol may cause drowsiness or dizziness, which may impair their ability to operate motor vehicles or machinery.
Because methocarbamol may possess a general CNS-depressant effect, patients should be cautioned about combined effects with alcohol and other CNS depressants.
  
         
 
  

Repackaged By / Distributed By: RemedyRepack Inc.
625 Kolter Drive, Indiana, PA 15701
(724) 465-8762









DRUG INTERACTIONS


See 
  
         
 
  
WARNINGS
 and 
  
         
 
  
PRECAUTIONS
 for interaction with CNS drugs and alcohol.
 
        

 
Methocarbamol may inhibit the effect of pyridostigmine bromide. Therefore, methocarbamol should be used with caution in patients with myasthenia gravis receiving anticholinesterase agents.
  
         
 
  












DRUG/LABORATORY TEST INTERACTIONS


Methocarbamol may cause color interference in certain screening tests for 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) using nitrosonaphthol reagent and in screening tests for urinary vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) using the Gitlow method.









CARCINOGENESIS, MUTAGENESIS, IMPAIRMENT OF FERTILITY


Long-term studies to evaluate the carcinogenic potential of methocarbamol have not been performed. No studies have been conducted to assess the effect of methocarbamol on mutagenesis or its potential to impair fertility.









PREGNANCY



Teratogenic Effects


Pregnancy Category C
  
         
 
  

Animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with methocarbamol. It is also not known whether methocarbamol can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman or can affect reproduction capacity. Methocarbamol tablets should be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed.
 
        

 
Safe use of methocarbamol tablet has not been established with regard to possible adverse effects upon fetal development. There have been reports of fetal and congenital abnormalities following in utero exposure to methocarbamol. Therefore, Methocarbamol tablets should not be used in women who are or may become pregnant and particularly during early pregnancy unless in the judgment of the physician the potential benefits outweigh the possible hazards (see 
  
         
 
  
WARNINGS
).
  
         
 
  












NURSING MOTHERS


Methocarbamol and/or its metabolites are excreted in the milk of dogs; however, it is not known whether methocarbamol or its metabolites are excreted in human milk. Because many drugs are excreted in human milk, caution should be exercised when methocarbamol tablets are administered to a nursing woman.









PEDIATRIC USE


Safety and effectiveness of methocarbamol tablets in pediatric patients below the age of 16 have not been established.
OVERDOSAGE


Limited information is available on the acute toxicity of methocarbamol. Overdose of methocarbamol is frequently in conjunction with alcohol or other CNS depressants and includes the following symptoms: nausea, drowsiness, blurred vision, hypotension, seizures, and coma.
In post-marketing experience, deaths have been reported with an overdose of methocarbamol alone or in the presence of other CNS depressants, alcohol or psychotropic drugs.
  
       
 
  








Treatment


Management of overdose includes symptomatic and supportive treatment. Supportive measures include maintenance of an adequate airway, monitoring urinary output and vital signs, and administration of intravenous fluids if necessary. The usefulness of hemodialysis in managing overdose is unknown.