ADVERSE REACTIONS

The following adverse reactions associated with the use of rifampin were identified in clinical studies or postmarketing reports. Because some of these reactions were reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure.





Gastrointestinal

Heartburn, epigastric distress, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, jaundice, flatulence, cramps, and diarrhea have been noted in some patients. Although
 
  Clostridium difficilehas been shown
 
  in vitroto be sensitive to rifampin, pseudomembranous colitis has been reported with the use of rifampin (and other broad-spectrum antibiotics). Therefore, it is important to consider this diagnosis in patients who develop diarrhea in association with antibiotic use. Tooth discoloration (which may be permanent) may occur.

 







Hepatic

Hepatotoxicity including transient abnormalities in liver function tests (e.g., elevations in serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, serum transaminases, gamma-glutamyl transferase), hepatitis, a shock-like syndrome with hepatic involvement and abnormal liver function tests, and cholestasis have been reported. (see
 
  
WARNINGS
).

 







Hematologic

Cases of thrombotic microangiopathy, including thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremic syndrome, have been reported (see
 
  
WARNINGS 
 
  ).

 
Thrombocytopenia has occurred primarily with high dose intermittent therapy, but has also been noted after resumption of interrupted treatment. It rarely occurs during well-supervised daily therapy. This effect is reversible if the drug is discontinued as soon as purpura occurs. Cerebral hemorrhage and fatalities have been reported when rifampin administration has been continued or resumed after the appearance of purpura.
Rare reports of disseminated intravascular coagulation have been observed.
Leukopenia, hemolytic anemia, decreased hemoglobin, bleeding, and vitamin K–dependent coagulation disorders (abnormal prolongation of prothrombin time or low vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors) have been observed.
Agranulocytosis has been reported very rarely.







Central Nervous System

Headache, fever, drowsiness, fatigue, ataxia, dizziness, inability to concentrate, mental confusion, behavioral changes, muscular weakness, pains in extremities, and generalized numbness have been observed.
Psychoses have been rarely reported.
Rare reports of myopathy have also been observed.







Ocular

Visual disturbances have been observed.







Endocrine

Menstrual disturbances have been observed.
Rare reports of adrenal insufficiency in patients with compromised adrenal function have been observed.







Renal

Elevations in BUN and serum uric acid have been reported. Rarely, hemolysis, hemoglobinuria, hematuria, interstitial nephritis, acute tubular necrosis, renal insufficiency, and acute renal failure have been noted. These are generally considered to be hypersensitivity reactions. They usually occur during intermittent therapy or when treatment is resumed following intentional or accidental interruption of a daily dosage regimen, and are reversible when rifampin is discontinued and appropriate therapy instituted.







Dermatologic

Cutaneous reactions are mild and self-limiting and do not appear to be hypersensitivity reactions. Typically, they consist of flushing and itching with or without a rash. More serious cutaneous reactions which may be due to hypersensitivity occur but are uncommon.







Hypersensitivity Reactions

Occasionally, pruritus, urticaria, rash, pemphigoid reaction, erythema multiforme, acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms syndrome (see
 
  
WARNINGS
), vasculitis, eosinophilia, sore mouth, sore tongue, and conjunctivitis have been observed.

 
Anaphylaxis has been reported rarely.







Respiratory, Thoracic and Mediastinal Disorders

Pulmonary toxicity (including, but not limited to, interstitial lung disease, pneumonitis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, eosinophilic pneumonia, pulmonary infiltrates, organizing pneumonia, respiratory failure, pulmonary fibrosis, and acute respiratory distress syndrome) has been observed (see
 
  
WARNINGS
).

 







Miscellaneous

Paradoxical drug reaction has been reported with Rifampin (see
 
  
WARNINGS
).

 
Edema of the face and extremities has been reported. Other reactions which have occurred with intermittent dosage regimens include "flu syndrome" (such as episodes of fever, chills, headache, dizziness, and bone pain), shortness of breath, wheezing, decrease in blood pressure and shock. The "flu syndrome" may also appear if rifampin is taken irregularly by the patient or if daily administration is resumed after a drug-free interval.
WARNINGS

Hepatotoxicity of hepatocellular, cholestatic, and mixed patterns has been reported in patients treated with rifampin. Severity ranged from asymptomatic elevations in liver enzymes, isolated jaundice/hyperbilirubinemia, symptomatic self-limited hepatitis to fulminant liver failure and death. Severe hepatic dysfunction including fatalities were reported in patients with liver disease and in patients taking rifampin with other hepatotoxic agents.
Monitor for symptoms and clinical/laboratory signs of liver injury, especially if treatment is prolonged or given with other hepatotoxic drugs. Patients with impaired liver function should be given rifampin only in cases of necessity and then under strict medical supervision. In these patients, careful monitoring of liver function should be done prior to therapy and then every 2 to 4 weeks during therapy. If signs of hepatic damage occur or worsen, discontinue rifampin. Rifampin has enzyme-inducing properties, including induction of delta amino levulinic acid synthetase. Isolated reports have associated porphyria exacerbation with rifampin administration.
The possibility of rapid emergence of resistant meningococci restricts the use of rifampin capsules to short-term treatment of the asymptomatic carrier state.
 
  Rifampin capsules are not to be used for the treatment of meningococcal disease.

Systemic hypersensitivity reactions were reported with rifampin capsules administration. Signs and symptoms of hypersensitivity reactions may include fever, rash, urticaria, angioedema, hypotension, acute bronchospasm, conjunctivitis, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, elevated liver transaminases or flu-like syndrome (weakness, fatigue, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, headache, chills, aches, itching, sweats, dizziness, shortness of breath, chest pain, cough, syncope, palpitations). Manifestations of hypersensitivity, such as fever, lymphadenopathy or laboratory abnormalities (including eosinophilia, liver abnormalities) may be present even though rash is not evident. Monitor patients receiving rifampin capsules for signs and/or symptoms of hypersensitivity reactions. If these signs or symptoms occur, discontinue rifampin capsules and administer supportive measures.
Cases of severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCAR) such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP), and drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome have been reported with rifampin. If symptoms or signs of severe cutaneous adverse reactions develop, discontinue rifampin capsules immediately and institute appropriate therapy.
Rifampin may cause vitamin K–dependent coagulation disorders and bleeding (see
 
  
ADVERSE REACTIONS
). Monitor coagulation tests during rifampin treatment (prothrombin time and other coagulation tests) in patients at risk of vitamin K deficiency (such as those with chronic liver disease, poor nutritional status, on prolonged antibacterial drugs or anticoagulants). Consider discontinuation of rifampin capsules if abnormal coagulation tests and/or bleeding occur. Supplemental vitamin K administration should be considered when appropriate.

 
Pulmonary toxicity manifested as interstitial lung disease (including, but not limited to, pneumonitis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, eosinophilic pneumonia, pulmonary infiltrates, and organizing pneumonia) has been reported with rifampin treatment. Pulmonary toxicity could be fatal. If symptoms or signs of severe pulmonary toxicity (including respiratory failure, pulmonary fibrosis, and acute respiratory distress syndrome) develop, discontinue rifampin capsules immediately and initiate appropriate treatment.
Postmarketing reports suggest that concomitant administration of high doses of cefazolin and rifampin may prolong the prothrombin time, leading to severe vitamin K–dependent coagulation disorders that may be life-threatening or fatal. Avoid concomitant use of cefazolin and rifampin in patients at increased risk for bleeding. If no alternative treatment options are available, closely monitor prothrombin time and other coagulation tests, and administer vitamin K as indicated.
Postmarketing cases of paradoxical drug reaction (recurrence or appearance of new symptoms, physical and radiological signs in a patient who had previously shown improvement with appropriate antimycobacterial treatment, in the absence of disease relapse, poor treatment compliance, drug resistance, side effects of treatment, or secondary infection/diagnosis) have been reported with Rifampin capsules (see
 
  
ADVERSE REACTIONS
). Paradoxical drug reactions are often transient and should not be misinterpreted as failure to respond to treatment. If worsening of symptoms or signs occurs during antimycobacterial treatment, consider paradoxical drug reaction in the differential diagnosis, monitor, or treat accordingly.

 
Cases of thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA), including thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremia syndrome, some fatal, have been reported with rifampin. Discontinue Rifampin if clinical symptoms and laboratory findings consistent with TMA occur. The findings of unexplained thrombocytopenia and anemia should prompt further evaluation and consideration of the diagnosis of TMA.
PRECAUTIONS




General

Rifampin capsules should be used with caution in patients with a history of diabetes mellitus, as diabetes management may be more difficult.
Prescribing rifampin in the absence of a proven or strongly suspected bacterial infection or a prophylactic indication is unlikely to provide benefit to the patient and increases the risk of the development of drug-resistant bacteria.
For the treatment of tuberculosis, rifampin is usually administered on a daily basis. Doses of rifampin greater than 600 mg given once or twice weekly have resulted in a higher incidence of adverse reactions, including the "flu syndrome" (fever, chills, and malaise), hematopoietic reactions (leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, or acute hemolytic anemia), cutaneous, gastrointestinal, and hepatic reactions, shortness of breath, shock, anaphylaxis, and renal failure. Recent studies indicate that regimens using twice-weekly doses of rifampin 600 mg plus isoniazid 15 mg/kg are much better tolerated.
Rifampin is not recommended for intermittent therapy; the patient should be cautioned against intentional or accidental interruption of the daily dosage regimen since rare renal hypersensitivity reactions have been reported when therapy was resumed in such cases.
Rifampin has enzyme induction properties that can enhance the metabolism of endogenous substrates including adrenal hormones, thyroid hormones, and vitamin D. Rifampin and isoniazid have been reported to alter vitamin D metabolism. In some cases, reduced levels of circulating 25-hydroxy vitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D have been accompanied by reduced serum calcium and phosphate, and elevated parathyroid hormone.







Information for Patients

Patients should be counseled that antibacterial drugs including rifampin should only be used to treat bacterial infections. They do not treat viral infections (e.g., the common cold). When rifampin is prescribed to treat a bacterial infection, patients should be told that although it is common to feel better early in the course of therapy, the medication should be taken exactly as directed. Skipping doses or not completing the full course of therapy may (1) decrease the effectiveness of the immediate treatment and (2) increase the likelihood that bacteria will develop resistance and will not be treatable by rifampin or other antibacterial drugs in the future.

The patient should be told that rifampin may produce a discoloration (yellow, orange, red, brown) of the teeth, urine, sweat, sputum, and tears, and the patient should be forewarned of this.Soft contact lenses may be permanently stained.

 
Rifampin is a well characterized and potent inducer of drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters and might therefore decrease or increase concomitant drug exposure and impact safety and efficacy (see
 
  
DRUG INTERACTIONS
). Therefore, patients should be advised not to take any other medication without medical advice.

 
The patient should be advised that the reliability of oral or other systemic hormonal contraceptives may be affected; consideration should be given to using alternative contraceptive measures.
Patients should be instructed to take rifampin either 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal with a full glass of water.
Patients should be instructed to notify their physician immediately if they experience any of the following: rash with fever or blisters, with or without peeling skin, itching, or swollen lymph nodes, loss of appetite, malaise, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, darkened urine, yellowish discoloration of the skin and eyes, light-colored bowel movements, fever, headache, fatigue, myalgias, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain, wheezing and pain or swelling of the joints.
Patients should be advised to seek medical advice immediately if their symptoms of mycobacterial disease, including, but not limited to, cough, fever, tiredness, shortness of breath, malaise, headache, pain, night sweats, swollen lymph nodes, loss of appetite, weight loss, weakness, skin ulcers or lesions, worsen (see
 
  
ADVERSE REACTIONS
).

 
Advise patients to abstain from alcohol, hepatotoxic medications or herbal products while taking rifampin.
Compliance with the full course of therapy must be emphasized, and the importance of not missing any doses must be stressed.







Laboratory Tests

Adults treated for tuberculosis with rifampin should have baseline measurements of hepatic enzymes, bilirubin, serum creatinine, a complete blood count, and a platelet count (or estimate). Baseline tests are unnecessary in pediatric patients unless a complicating condition is known or clinically suspected.
Patients should be seen at least monthly during therapy and should be specifically questioned concerning symptoms associated with adverse reactions. All patients with abnormalities should have follow-up, including laboratory testing, if necessary. Routine laboratory monitoring for toxicity in people with normal baseline measurements is generally not necessary.







Drug Interactions



Pharmacodynamic Interactions


Healthy subjects who received rifampin 600 mg once daily concomitantly with saquinavir 1000 mg/ritonavir 100 mg twice daily (ritonavir-boosted saquinavir) developed severe hepatocellular toxicity. Therefore, concomitant use of these medications is contraindicated. (See
 
  
CONTRAINDICATIONS.
 
  )

 
When rifampin is given concomitantly with other hepatotoxic medications such as halothane or isoniazid, the potential for hepatotoxicity is increased. The concomitant use of rifampin and halothane should be avoided. Patients receiving both rifampin and isoniazid should be monitored closely for hepatotoxicity.





Effect of rifampin on other drugs


Induction of Drug Metabolizing Enzymes and Transporters

Drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters affected by rifampin include cytochromes P450 (CYP) 1A2, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, and 3A4, UDP-glucuronyltransferases (UGT), sulfotransferases, carboxylesterases, and transporters including P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2). Most drugs are substrates for one or more of these enzyme or transporter pathways and these pathways may be induced by rifampin simultaneously. Therefore, rifampin may increase the metabolism and decrease the activity of certain coadministered drugs or increase the activity of a coadministered pro-drug (where metabolic activation is required) and has the potential to perpetuate clinically important drug-drug interactions against many drugs and across many drug classes (Table 1).
Table 1 summarizes the effect of rifampin on other drugs or drug classes. Adjust dosages of concomitant drugs based on approved drug labeling and if applicable, therapeutic drug monitoring, unless otherwise specified.

Table 1: Drug Interactions with Rifampin that Affect Concomitant Drug Concentrations
  
   a








aAdministered with rifampin 600 mg daily, unless otherwise specified
    
     





bRifampin dosage used concomitantly with the drug(s) is not specified in the proposed package insert.
    
     





cAdministered with rifampin 300 mg daily
    
     





dAdministered with rifampin 450 mg daily
    
     





eAdministered with rifampin 1200 mg daily
    
     





fRifampin 1200 mg administered as a single oral dose 8 hours before administering a single oral dose of nifedipine 10 mg
    
     





gNumerous cases in the literature describe a decrease in glucocorticoid effect when used concomitantly with rifampin. The literature contains reports of acute adrenal crisis or adrenal insufficiency induced by the combination of rifampin-isoniazid-ethambutol or rifampin-isoniazid in patients with Addison's disease
    
     





hAdministered with rifampin 900 mg daily
    
     





iA tuberculosis treatment regimen including rifampin (600 mg/day) isoniazid (300 mg/day), pyrazinamide (500 mg 3× per day), and pyridoxine (25 mg) was associated with higher than expected doses of nortriptyline were required to obtain a therapeutic drug level. Following the discontinuation of rifampin, the patient became drowsy and the serum nortriptyline levels rose precipitously (3-fold) into the toxic range.
    
     





jConcomitant use with rifampin in 2 children
    
     





kAdministered with rifampin (10 mg/kg daily)
    
     





lAdministered with an antibiotic regimen including rifampin (450 mg/day), isoniazid (300 mg/day), and streptomycin (0.5 g/day) IM
    
     




AUC = area under the time-concentration curve






Drug or Drug Class and Prevention or Management



Clinical Effect





Antiretrovirals

Prevention or Management:Concomitant use is contraindicated (see
    
     CONTRAINDICATIONS) 
     



Atazanavir 
     

Decrease AUC by 72% 
     



Darunavir
    
     b


Substantial decrease in exposure, which may result in loss of therapeutic effect and development of resistance. 
     



Tipranavir 
     




Fosamprenavir
    
     c


Decrease AUC by 82% 
     



Saquinavir 
     

Decrease AUC by 70% 
       Coadministration may result in severe hepatocellular toxicity 
     




Antiretrovirals

Prevention or Management:Avoid concomitant use 
     



Zidovudine 
     

Decrease AUC by 47% 
     



Indinavir 
     

Decrease AUC by 92% 
     



Efavirenz 
     

Decrease AUC by 26 % 
     




Cortisol Receptor Blocker




Mifepristone 
     
Prevention or Management:Avoid concominant use 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Hepatitis C Antiviral

Prevention or Management:Avoid concomitant use 
     



Daclatasvir 
     

Decrease AUC by 79% 
     



Simeprevir 
     

Decrease AUC by 48% 
     



Sofosbuvir
    
     b


Decrease AUC by 72% 
       Coadministration of sofosbuvir with rifampin, may decrease sofosbuvir plasma concentrations, leading to reduced therapeutic effect of sofosbuvir. 
     



Telaprevir 
     

Decrease AUC by 92% 
     




Systemic Hormonal Contraceptives

Prevention or Management:Advise patients to change to non-hormonal methods of birth control during rifampin therapy 
     



Estrogens 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Progestins 
     




Anticonvulsants




Phenytoin
    
     d


Decrease exposure
    
     d





Antiarrhythmics




Disopyramide 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Mexiletine 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Quinidine 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Propafenone 
     

Decrease AUC by 50% to 67% 
     



Tocainide 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Antiestrogens




Tamoxifen 
     

Decrease AUC by 86% 
     



Toremifene 
     

Decrease steady state concentrations of toremifene in serum 
     




Antithrombotic Agents







Clopidogrel 
     
Prevention or Management:Concomitant use of clopidogrel and rifampin should be discouraged 
     

Increase active metabolite exposure and risk of bleeding 
     



Ticagrelor 
     
 Prevention or Management:Avoid use 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Antipsychotics




Haloperidol 
     

Decrease plasma concentrations by 70% 
     



Lurasidone 
     
Prevention or Management: Concomitant use is contraindicated (See
    
     
CONTRAINDICATIONS
) 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Oral Anticoagulants

Prevention or Management:Perform prothrombin time daily or as frequently as necessary to establish and maintain the required dose of anticoagulant 
     



Warfarin 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Antifungals




Fluconazole 
     

Decrease AUC by 23% 
     



Itraconazole 
     
Prevention or Management:Not recommended 2 weeks before and during itraconazole treatment 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Ketoconazole 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Beta-blockers




Metoprolol 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Propranolol 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Benzodiazepines




Diazepam
    
     a,e


Decrease exposure 
     




Benzodiazepine-related drugs




Zopiclone 
     

Decrease AUC by 82% 
     



Zolpidem 
     

Decrease AUC by 73% 
     




Calcium Channel Blockers
     
      e





Diltiazem 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Nifedipine
    
     f


Decrease exposure 
     



Verapamil 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Corticosteroids
     
      g





Prednisolone 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Cardiac Glycosides




Digoxin 
     
Prevention or Management:Measure serum digoxin concentrations before initiating rifampin. Continue monitoring and increase digoxin dose by approximately 20% to 40% as necessary. 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Digitoxin 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Fluoroquinolones




Pefloxacin
    
     h


Decrease exposure 
     



Moxifloxacin
    
     a,d


Decrease exposure 
     




Oral Hypoglycemic Agents (e.g. sulfonylureas)




Glyburide 
     

Decrease exposure 
       Rifampin may worsen glucose control of glyburide 
     



Glipizide 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Immunosuppressive Agents




Cyclosporine 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Tacrolimus 
     
Prevention or Management:Monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when rifampin and tacrolimus are used concomitantly. 
     

Decrease AUC by 56% 
     




Narcotic Analgesics




Oxycodone 
     

Decrease AUC by 86% 
     



Morphine 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Progestin Antagonist




Mifepristone 
     
Prevention or Management:Refer to the post-treatment assessment in the mifepristone prescribing information to verify that treatment has been successful. 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Selective 5-HT3 Receptor Antagonists




Ondansetron 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Statins Metabolized by CYP3A4




Simvastatin 
     

Decrease exposure 
     




Thiazolidinediones




Rosiglitazone 
     

Decrease AUC by 66% 
     




Tricyclic Antidepressants




Nortriptyline
    
     i


Decrease exposure 
     




Other Drugs




Enalapril 
     

Decrease active metabolite exposure 
     



Chloramphenicol
    
     j


Decrease exposure 
     



Clarithromycin 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Dapsone 
     

Rifampin has been shown to increase the clearance of dapsone and, accordingly, decrease dapsone exposure. Rifampin has also been shown to increase the production of the hydroxylamine metabolite of dapsone which could increase the risk of methemoglobinemia 
     



Doxycycline
    
     k


Decrease exposure 
     



Irinotecan
    
     l

Prevention or Management:Avoid the use of rifampin, strong CYP3A4 inducer, if possible. Substitute non-enzyme inducing therapies at least 2 weeks prior to initiation of irinotecan therapy 
     

Decrease irinotecan and active metabolite exposure 
     



Levothyroxine 
     

Decrease exposure 
     



Losartan 
     

Parent 
     

Decrease AUC by 30% 
     



Active metabolite (E3174) 
     

Decrease AUC by 40%. 
     



Methadone 
     

In patients well-stabilized on methadone, concomitant administration of rifampin resulted in a marked reduction in serum methadone levels and a concurrent appearance of withdrawal symptoms. 
     



Praziquantel 
     
Prevention or Management:Concomitant use is contraindicated (See
    
     CONTRAINDICATIONS) 
     

Decrease plasma praziquantel concentrations to undetectable levels. 
     



Quinine 
     
Prevention or Management:Avoid concomitant use 
     

Decrease AUC by 75% to 85% 
     



Telithromycin 
     

Decrease AUC by 86% 
     



Theophylline 
     

Decrease exposure by 20% to 40% 
     











Effect of other drugs on rifampin

Concomitant antacid administration may reduce the absorption of rifampin. Daily doses of rifampin should be given at least 1 hour before the ingestion of antacids.
Concomitant use with probenecid and cotrimoxazole increases the concentration of rifampin which may increase the risk of rifampin toxicities. Monitor for adverse reactions associated with rifampin during coadministration.







Other Interactions

Atovaquone: Concomitant use of rifampin with atovaquone decrease concentrations of atovaquone and increase concentrations of rifampin which may increase the risk of rifampin toxicities. Coadministration of rifampin with atovaquone is not recommended.









Drug/Laboratory Interactions

Cross-reactivity and false-positive urine screening tests for opiates have been reported in patients receiving rifampin when using the KIMS (Kinetic Interaction of Microparticles in Solution) method (e.g., Abuscreen OnLine opiates assay; Roche Diagnostic Systems). Confirmatory tests, such as gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, will distinguish rifampin from opiates.
Therapeutic levels of rifampin have been shown to inhibit standard microbiological assays for serum folate and vitamin B
 
  12. Thus, alternate assay methods should be considered. Transient abnormalities in liver function tests (e.g., elevation in serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and serum transaminases) and reduced biliary excretion of contrast media used for visualization of the gallbladder have also been observed. Therefore, these tests should be performed before the morning dose of rifampin.

 







Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility

A few cases of accelerated growth of lung carcinoma have been reported in man, but a causal relationship with the drug has not been established. Hepatomas were increased in female (C3Hf/DP) mice dosed for 60 weeks with rifampin followed by an observation period of 46 weeks, at 20 to 120 mg/kg (equivalent to 0.1 to 0.5 times the maximum dosage used clinically, based on body surface area comparisons). There was no evidence of tumorigenicity in male C3Hf/DP mice or in similar studies in BALB/c mice, or in two year studies in Wistar rats.
There was no evidence of mutagenicity in both prokaryotic (
 
  Salmonella typhi, Escherichia coli) and eukaryotic (
 
  Saccharomyces cerevisiae) bacteria,
 
  Drosophila melanogaster,or ICR/Ha Swiss mice. An increase in chromatid breaks was noted when whole blood cell cultures were treated with rifampin. Increased frequency of chromosomal aberrations was observed
 
  in vitroin lymphocytes obtained from patients treated with combinations of rifampin, isoniazid, and pyrazinamide and combinations of streptomycin, rifampin, isoniazid, and pyrazinamide.

 







Pregnancy–Teratogenic Effects

Rifampin has been shown to be teratogenic in rodents. Congenital malformations, primarily spina bifida, were increased in the offspring of pregnant rats given rifampin during organogenesis at oral doses of 150 to 250 mg/kg/day (about 1 to 2 times the maximum recommended human dose based on body surface area comparisons). Cleft palate was increased in a dose-dependent fashion in fetuses of pregnant mice treated at oral doses of 50 to 200 mg/kg (about 0.2 to 0.8 times the maximum recommended human dose based on body surface area comparisons). Imperfect osteogenesis and embryotoxicity were also reported in pregnant rabbits given rifampin at oral doses up to 200 mg/kg/day (about 3 times the maximum recommended human dose based on body surface area comparisons). There are no adequate and well-controlled studies of rifampin in pregnant women. Rifampin has been reported to cross the placental barrier and appear in cord blood. Rifampin should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus.







Pregnancy–Non-Teratogenic Effects

When administered during the last few weeks of pregnancy, rifampin can cause postnatal hemorrhages in the mother and infant for which treatment with vitamin K may be indicated.







Nursing Mothers

Because of the potential for tumorigenicity shown for rifampin in animal studies, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.







Pediatric Use

See
 
  
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY–Pediatrics
; see also
 
  
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
.

 







Geriatric Use

Clinical studies of rifampin did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects. Other reported clinical experience has not identified differences in responses between the elderly and younger patients. Caution should therefore be observed in using rifampin in elderly patients. (See
 
  
WARNINGS 
 
  ).
OVERDOSAGE




Signs and Symptoms

Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, pruritus, headache, and increasing lethargy will probably occur within a short time after ingestion; unconsciousness may occur when there is severe hepatic disease. Transient increases in liver enzymes and/or bilirubin may occur. Brownish-red or orange discoloration of the skin, urine, sweat, saliva, tears, and feces will occur, and its intensity is proportional to the amount ingested.
Liver enlargement, possibly with tenderness, can develop within a few hours after severe overdosage; bilirubin levels may increase and jaundice may develop rapidly. Hepatic involvement may be more marked in patients with prior impairment of hepatic function. Other physical findings remain essentially normal. A direct effect upon the hematopoietic system, electrolyte levels, or acid-base balance is unlikely.
Facial or periorbital edema has also been reported in pediatric patients. Hypotension, sinus tachycardia, ventricular arrhythmias, seizures, and cardiac arrest were reported in some fatal cases.







Acute Toxicity

The minimum acute lethal or toxic dose is not well established. However, nonfatal acute overdoses in adults have been reported with doses ranging from 9 to 12 gm rifampin. Fatal acute overdoses in adults have been reported with doses ranging from 14 to 60 gm. Alcohol or a history of alcohol abuse was involved in some of the fatal and nonfatal reports. Nonfatal overdoses in pediatric patients ages 1 to 4 years old of 100 mg/kg for one to two doses has been reported.







Treatment

Intensive support measures should be instituted and individual symptoms treated as they arise. The airway should be secured and adequate respiratory exchange established. Since nausea and vomiting are likely to be present, gastric lavage within the first 2 to 3 hours after ingestion is probably preferable to induction of emesis. Following evacuation of the gastric contents, the instillation of activated charcoal slurry into the stomach may help absorb any remaining drug from the gastrointestinal tract. Antiemetic medication may be required to control severe nausea and vomiting.
Active diuresis (with measured intake and output) will help promote excretion of the drug.
For severe cases, extracorporeal hemodialysis may be required. If this is not available, peritoneal dialysis can be used along with forced diuresis.