6 ADVERSE REACTIONS


The following adverse reactions are discussed in more detail in other sections of the labeling:



Myocardial Ischemia, Myocardial Infarction, and Prinzmetal’s Angina [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
Arrhythmias [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].

Chest, Throat, Neck and/or Jaw Pain/Tightness/Pressure [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].
Cerebrovascular Events [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]. 
Other Vasospasm Reactions [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)]. 
Medication Overuse Headache [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)]. 
Serotonin Syndrome [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)]. 
Increase in Blood Pressure [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8)]. 







The most common adverse reactions in adults were (incidence ≥ 5% and greater than placebo): asthenia/fatigue, somnolence, pain/pressure sensation and dizziness (6.1)


To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Rising Health, LLC at 1-833-395-6928 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch.








6.1 Clinical Trials Experience


Because clinical studies are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical studies of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical studies of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice.

 Adults



Incidence in Controlled Clinical Trials
 
Adverse reactions to rizatriptan benzoate were assessed in controlled clinical trials that included over 3700 adult patients who received single or multiple doses of rizatriptan benzoate tablets. The most common adverse reactions during treatment with rizatriptan benzoate (≥5% in either treatment group and greater than placebo) were asthenia/fatigue, somnolence, pain/pressure sensation and dizziness. These adverse reactions appeared to be dose related.
Table 1 lists the adverse reactions (incidence ≥2% and greater than placebo) after a single dose of rizatriptan benzoate in adults. 


Table 1: Incidence (≥2% and Greater than Placebo) of Adverse Reactions After a Single Dose of Rizatriptan Benzoate Tablets or Placebo in Adults 
			









Adverse Reactions



% of Patients





Rizatriptan

Benzoate 

5 mg

(N=977)



Rizatriptan 

Benzoate 

10 mg

(N=1167)



Placebo

(N=627)





 Atypical Sensations



4


5


4




     Paresthesia


3


4


<2





 Pain and other Pressure Sensations



6


9


3




     Chest Pain:













          tightness/pressure and/or heaviness


<2


3


1




     Neck/throat/jaw:













          pain/tightness/pressure

<2


2


1




     Regional Pain:












          tightness/pressure and/or heaviness

<1


2


0




     Pain, location unspecified

3


3


<2





 Digestive


9


13


8




     Dry Mouth

3


3


1




     Nausea

4


6


4





 Neurological


14


20


11




     Dizziness

4


9


5




     Headache

<2


2


<1




     Somnolence

4


8


4





 Other













     Asthenia/fatigue


4


7


2






The frequencies of adverse reactions in clinical trials did not increase when up to three doses were taken within 24 hours. Adverse reaction frequencies were also unchanged by concomitant use of drugs commonly taken for migraine prophylaxis (including propranolol), oral contraceptives, or analgesics. The incidences of adverse reactions were not affected by age or gender. There were insufficient data to assess the impact of race on the incidence of adverse reactions.


Other Events Observed in Association with the Administration of 


Rizatriptan Benzoate 


in Adults 


In the following section, the frequencies of less commonly reported adverse events are presented that were not reported in other sections of the labeling. Because the reports include events observed in open studies, the role of rizatriptan benzoate in their causation cannot be reliably determined. Furthermore, variability associated with adverse event reporting, the terminology used to describe adverse events, limit the value of the quantitative frequency estimates provided. Event frequencies are calculated as the number of patients who used rizatriptan benzoate and reported an event divided by the total number of patients exposed to rizatriptan benzoate (N=3716). All reported events occurred at an incidence ≥1%, or are believed to be reasonably associated with the use of the drug. Events are further classified within body system categories and enumerated in order of decreasing frequency using the following definitions: frequent adverse events are those defined as those occurring in at least (>)1/100 patients; infrequent adverse experiences are those occurring in 1/100 to 1/1000 patients; and rare adverse experiences are those occurring in fewer than 1/1000 patients.

General: Infrequent was facial edema. Rare were syncope and edema/swelling.

Atypical Sensations: Frequent were warm sensations.



Cardiovascular: Frequent was palpitation. Infrequent were tachycardia, cold extremities, and bradycardia. 

 Digestive: Frequent were diarrhea and vomiting. Infrequent were dyspepsia, tongue edema and abdominal distention.



Musculoskeletal: Infrequent were muscle weakness, stiffness, myalgia and muscle cramp/spasm.

Neurological/Psychiatric: Frequent were hypoesthesia, euphoria and tremor. Infrequent were vertigo, insomnia, confusion/disorientation, gait abnormality, memory impairment, and agitation.

Respiratory: Frequent was dyspnea. Infrequent was pharyngeal edema.

Special Senses: Infrequent were blurred vision and tinnitus. Rare was eye swelling.

Skin and Skin Appendage: Frequent was flushing. Infrequent were sweating, pruritus, rash, and urticaria. Rare was erythema, hot flashes.



The adverse reaction profile seen with rizatriptan benzoate orally disintegrating tablets was similar to that seen with rizatriptan benzoate tablets.

Pediatric Patients 6 to 17 Years of Age



Incidence in Controlled Clinical Trials in Pediatric Patients


 



Adverse reactions to rizatriptan benzoate orally disintegrating tablets were assessed in a controlled clinical trial in the acute treatment of migraines (Study 7) that included a total of 1382 pediatric patients 6 to 17 years of age, of which 977 (72%) administered at least one dose of study treatment (rizatriptan benzoate orally disintegrating tablets and/or placebo) [see Clinical Studies (14.2)]. The incidence of adverse reactions reported for pediatric patients in the acute clinical trial was similar in patients who received rizatriptan benzoate tablets to those who received placebo. The adverse reaction pattern in pediatric patients is expected to be similar to that in adults. 



Other Events Observed in Association with the Administration of 


Rizatriptan Benzoate Orally Disintegrating Tablets in Pediatric Patients


 



In the following section, the frequencies of less commonly reported adverse events are presented. Because the reports include events observed in open studies, the role of rizatriptan benzoate orally disintegrating tablets in their causation cannot be reliably determined. Furthermore, variability associated with adverse event reporting, the terminology used to describe adverse events, limit the value of the quantitative frequency estimates provided. 

Event frequencies are calculated as the number of pediatric patients 6 to 17 years of age who used rizatriptan benzoate orally disintegrating tablets and reported an event divided by the total number of patients exposed to rizatriptan benzoate orally disintegrating tablets (N=1068). All reported events occurred at an incidence ≥1%, or are believed to be reasonably associated with the use of the drug. Events are further classified within system organ class and enumerated in order of decreasing frequency using the following definitions: frequent adverse events are those occurring in (>)1/100 pediatric patients; infrequent adverse experiences are those occurring in 1/100 to 1/1000 pediatric patients; and rare adverse experiences are those occurring in fewer than 1/1000 patients.

General: Frequent was fatigue.

Ear and labyrinth disorders: Infrequent was hypoacusis.

Gastrointestinal disorders: Frequent was abdominal discomfort.

Nervous system disorders: Infrequent were coordination abnormal, disturbance in attention, and presyncope.

Psychiatric disorders: Infrequent was hallucination.








6.2 Postmarketing Experience


The following section enumerates potentially important adverse events that have occurred in clinical practice and which have been reported spontaneously to various surveillance systems. The events enumerated include all except those already listed in other sections of the labeling or those too general to be informative. Because the reports cite events reported spontaneously from worldwide postmarketing experience, frequency of events and the role of rizatriptan benzoate in their causation cannot be reliably determined.

Neurological/Psychiatric: Seizure.

General: Allergic conditions including anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid reaction, angioedema, wheezing, and toxic epidermal necrolysis [see Contraindications (4)].


 Special Senses: Dysgeusia.
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS





Myocardial ischemia, myocardial infarction, and Prinzmetal's angina: Perform cardiac evaluation in patients with multiple cardiovascular risk factors (5.1)

Arrhythmias: Discontinue dosing if occurs (5.2)

Chest/throat/neck/jaw pain, tightness, pressure, or heaviness; Generally not associated with myocardial ischemia; Evaluate patients at high risk (5.3)

Cerebral hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and stroke: Discontinue dosing if occurs (5.4)

Gastrointestinal ischemic events, peripheral vasospastic reactions: Discontinue dosing if occurs (5.5)

Medication overuse headache: Detoxification may be necessary (5.6)

Serotonin syndrome: Discontinue dosing if occurs (5.7)









5.1 Myocardial Ischemia, Myocardial Infarction, and Prinzmetal's Angina

Rizatriptan benzoate should not be given to patients with ischemic or vasospastic coronary artery disease. There have been rare reports of serious cardiac adverse reactions, including acute myocardial infarction, occurring within a few hours following administration of rizatriptan benzoate. Some of these reactions occurred in patients without known coronary artery disease (CAD). 5-HT1 agonists, including rizatriptan benzoate may cause coronary artery vasospasm (Prinzmetal’s Angina), even in patients without a history of CAD.
 Triptan-naïve patients who have multiple cardiovascular risk factors (e.g., increased age, diabetes, hypertension, smoking, obesity, strong family history of CAD) should have a cardiovascular evaluation prior to receiving rizatriptan benzoate. If there is evidence of CAD or coronary artery vasospasm, rizatriptan benzoate should not be administered [see Contraindications (4)]. For patients who have a negative cardiovascular evaluation, consideration should be given to administration of the first rizatriptan benzoate dose in a medically-supervised setting and performing an electrocardiogram (ECG) immediately following rizatriptan benzoate administration. Periodic cardiovascular evaluation should be considered in intermittent long-term users of rizatriptan benzoate who have cardiovascular risk factors.








5.2 Arrhythmias


Life-threatening disturbances of cardiac rhythm, including ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation leading to death, have been reported within a few hours following the administration of 5-HT1 agonists. Discontinue rizatriptan benzoate if these disturbances occur.








5.3 Chest, Throat, Neck and/or Jaw Pain/Tightness/Pressure


As with other 5-HT1 agonists, sensations of tightness, pain, pressure, and heaviness in the precordium, throat, neck and jaw commonly occur after treatment with rizatriptan benzoate and are usually non­-cardiac in origin. However, if a cardiac origin is suspected, patients should be evaluated. Patients shown to have CAD and those with Prinzmetal’s variant angina should not receive 5-HT1 agonists.








5.4 Cerebrovascular Events


Cerebral hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and stroke have occurred in patients treated with 5-HT1 agonists, and some have resulted in fatalities. In a number of cases, it appears possible that the cerebrovascular events were primary, the 5-HT1 agonist having been administered in the incorrect belief that the symptoms experienced were a consequence of migraine, when they were not. Also, patients with migraine may be at increased risk of certain cerebrovascular events (e.g., stroke, hemorrhage, transient ischemic attack). Discontinue rizatriptan benzoate if a cerebrovascular event occurs.
As with other acute migraine therapies, before treating headaches in patients not previously diagnosed as migraineurs, and in migraineurs who present with atypical symptoms, care should be taken to exclude other potentially serious neurological conditions. Rizatriptan benzoate should not be administered to patients with a history of stroke or transient ischemic attack [see Contraindications (4)].








5.5 Other Vasospasm Reactions


5-HT1 agonists, including rizatriptan benzoate, may cause non-coronary vasospastic reactions, such as peripheral vascular ischemia, gastrointestinal vascular ischemia and infarction (presenting with abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea), splenic infarction, and Raynaud’s syndrome. In patients who experience symptoms or signs suggestive of non-coronary vasospasm reaction following the use of any 5-HT1 agonist, the suspected vasospasm reaction should be ruled out before receiving additional rizatriptan benzoate doses.
Reports of transient and permanent blindness and significant partial vision loss have been reported with the use of 5-HT1 agonists. Since visual disorders may be part of a migraine attack, a causal relationship between these events and the use of 5-HT1 agonists have not been clearly established.








5.6 Medication Overuse Headache


Overuse of acute migraine drugs (e.g., ergotamine, triptans, opioids, or a combination of drugs for 10 or more days per month) may lead to exacerbation of headache (medication overuse headache). Medication overuse headache may present as migraine-like daily headaches, or as a marked increase in frequency of migraine attacks. Detoxification of patients, including withdrawal of the overused drugs, and treatment of withdrawal symptoms (which often includes a transient worsening of headache) may be necessary.








5.7 Serotonin Syndrome


Serotonin syndrome may occur with triptans, including rizatriptan benzoate particularly during co-administration with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and MAO inhibitors [see Drug Interactions (7.5)]. Serotonin syndrome symptoms may include mental status changes (e.g., agitation, hallucinations, coma), autonomic instability (e.g., tachycardia, labile blood pressure, hyperthermia), neuromuscular aberrations (e.g., hyperreflexia, incoordination) and/or gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., nausea, vomiting, diarrhea). The onset of symptoms can occur within minutes to hours of receiving a new or a greater dose of a serotonergic medication. Rizatriptan benzoate treatment should be discontinued if serotonin syndrome is suspected [see Drug Interactions (7.4) and Patient Counseling Information (17)].








5.8 Increase in Blood Pressure


Significant elevation in blood pressure, including hypertensive crisis with acute impairment of organ systems, has been reported on rare occasions in patients with and without a history of hypertension receiving 5-HT1 agonists, including rizatriptan benzoate. In healthy young adult male and female patients who received maximal doses of rizatriptan benzoate (10 mg every 2 hours for 3 doses), slight increases in blood pressure (approximately 2 to 3 mmHg) were observed. Rizatriptan benzoate is contraindicated in patients with uncontrolled hypertension [see Contraindications (4)].
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS





Pregnancy: Based on animal data, may cause fetal harm (8.1)








8.1 Pregnancy


Risk Summary


Available human data on the use of rizatriptan benzoate in pregnant women are not sufficient to draw conclusions about drug-associated risk for major birth defects and miscarriage. 

In animal studies, developmental toxicity was observed following oral administration of rizatriptan during pregnancy (decreased fetal body weight in rats) or throughout pregnancy and lactation (increased mortality, decreased body weight, and neurobehavioral impairment in rat offspring) at maternal plasma exposures greater than that expected at therapeutic doses in humans [see Animal Data].


In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and of miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2% to 4% and 15% to 20%, respectively. The reported rate of major birth defects among deliveries to women with migraine range from 2.2% to 2.9% and the reported rate of miscarriage was 17%, which are similar to rates reported in women without migraine. 


Clinical Considerations 



Disease-Associated Maternal and/or Embryo/Fetal Risk 

In women with migraine, there is an increased risk of adverse perinatal outcomes in the mother, including pre-eclampsia and gestational hypertension. 


Data 



Human Data 


The Pregnancy Registry for rizatriptan benzoate did not identify any pattern of congenital anomalies or other adverse birth outcomes over the period of 1998 to 2018. However, the lack of identification of any pattern should be viewed with caution, as the number of prospective reports with outcome information was low and did not provide sufficient power to detect an increased risk of individual birth defects associated with the use of rizatriptan benzoate. Additionally, there was significant loss to follow-up in the prospective pregnancy reports, further complicating this assessment of an association between rizatriptan benzoate and any pattern of congenital anomalies or other adverse birth outcomes. 

In a study using data from the Swedish Medical Birth Register, live births to women who reported using triptans or ergots during pregnancy were compared with those of women who did not. Of the 157 births with first-trimester exposure to rizatriptan, 7 infants were born with malformations (relative risk 1.01 [95% CI: 0.40 to 2.08]). A study using linked data from the Medical Birth Registry of Norway to the Norwegian Prescription Database compared pregnancy outcomes in women who redeemed prescriptions for triptans during pregnancy, as well as a migraine disease comparison group who redeemed prescriptions for triptans before pregnancy only, compared with a population control group. Of the 310 women who redeemed prescriptions for rizatriptan during the first trimester, 10 had infants with major congenital malformations (OR 1.03 [95% CI: 0.55 to 1.93]), while for the 271 women who redeemed prescriptions for rizatriptan before, but not during, pregnancy, 12 had infants with major congenital malformations (OR 1.48 [95% CI: 0.83 to 2.64]), each compared with the population comparison group. 

Animal Data 


When rizatriptan (0, 2, 10, or 100 mg/kg/day) was administered orally to pregnant rats throughout organogenesis, a decrease in fetal body weight was observed at the highest doses tested. At the mid dose (10 mg/kg/day), which was a no-effect dose for adverse effects on embryofetal development, plasma exposure (AUC) was approximately 15 times that in humans at the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD) of 30 mg/day. When rizatriptan (0, 5, 10, or 50 mg/kg/day) was administered orally to pregnant rabbits throughout organogenesis, no adverse fetal effects were observed. Plasma exposure (AUC) at the highest dose tested was 115 times that in humans at the MRHD. Placental transfer of drug to the fetus was demonstrated in both species. 

Oral administration of rizatriptan (0, 2, 10, or 100 mg/kg/day) to female rats prior to and during mating and continuing throughout gestation and lactation resulted in reduced body weight in offspring from birth and throughout lactation at all but the lowest dose tested (2 mg/kg/day). Plasma exposure (AUC) at the no-effect dose (2 mg/kg/day) for adverse effects on postnatal development was similar to that in humans at the MRHD.

Oral administration of rizatriptan (0, 5, 100, or 250 mg/kg/day) throughout organogenesis and lactation resulted in neonatal mortality, reduced body weight (which persisted into adulthood), and impaired neurobehavioral function in offspring at all but the lowest dose tested. Plasma exposure (AUC) at the no-effect dose for adverse effects on postnatal development (5 mg/kg/day) was approximately 8 times that in humans at the MRHD. 








8.2 Lactation


Risk Summary 


There are no data on the presence of rizatriptan or any active metabolites in human milk, or on the effects of rizatriptan on the breastfed infant, or on milk production.

Rizatriptan was excreted in rat milk, with levels in milk approximately 6 times those in maternal plasma.

The developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding should be considered along with the mother’s clinical need for rizatriptan benzoate and any potential adverse effects on the breastfed infant from rizatriptan benzoate or from the underlying maternal condition. 


Data 


Following oral administration of rizatriptan to lactating rats at a dose of 100 mg/kg/day, drug  concentrations of rizatriptan in milk samples exceeded maternal plasma drug concentrations by approximately 6-fold.








8.4 Pediatric Use

Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients under 6 years of age have not been established.
 The efficacy and safety of rizatriptan benzoate in the acute treatment of migraine in patients aged 6 to 17 years was established in an adequate and well-controlled study [see Clinical Studies (14.2)].
 The incidence of adverse reactions reported for pediatric patients in the acute clinical trial was similar in patients who received rizatriptan benzoate to those who received placebo. The adverse reaction pattern in pediatric patients is expected to be similar to that in adults.








8.5 Geriatric Use


Clinical studies of rizatriptan benzoate did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects. Other reported clinical experience has not identified differences in responses between the elderly and younger patients. 
Although the pharmacokinetics of rizatriptan were similar in elderly (aged ≥65 years) and in younger adults (n=17), in general, dose selection for an elderly patient should be cautious, starting at the low end of the dosing range. This reflects the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function, and of concomitant disease or other drug therapy.
Geriatric patients who have other cardiovascular risk factors (e.g., diabetes, hypertension, smoking, obesity, strong family history of coronary artery disease) should have a cardiovascular evaluation prior to receiving rizatriptan benzoate [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
10 OVERDOSAGE


No overdoses of rizatriptan benzoate were reported during clinical trials in adults.
Some adult patients who received 40 mg of rizatriptan benzoate either a single dose or as two doses with a 2-hour interdose interval had dizziness and somnolence.
In a clinical pharmacology study in which 12 adult subjects received rizatriptan benzoate, at total cumulative doses of 80 mg (given within four hours), two of the subjects experienced syncope, dizziness, bradycardia including third degree AV block, vomiting, and/or incontinence.
 In the long-term, open label study, involving 606 treated pediatric migraineurs 12 to 17 years of age (of which 432 were treated for at least 12 months), 151 patients (25%) took two 10 mg doses of rizatriptan benzoate orally disintegrating tablets within a 24-hour period. Adverse reactions for 3 of these patients included abdominal discomfort, fatigue, and dyspnea.
 In addition, based on the pharmacology of rizatriptan benzoate, hypertension or myocardial ischemia could occur after overdosage. Gastrointestinal decontamination, (i.e., gastric lavage followed by activated charcoal) should be considered in patients suspected of an overdose with rizatriptan benzoate. Clinical and electrocardiographic monitoring should be continued for at least 12 hours, even if clinical symptoms are not observed.
 The effects of hemo- or peritoneal dialysis on serum concentrations of rizatriptan are unknown.