6 ADVERSE REACTIONS

The following adverse reaction is described elsewhere in labeling: 


•Renal dysfunction upon use with ramipril [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)]









•Hypertension: The most common adverse events (≥ 1%) reported in hypertension trials are back pain, sinusitis, and diarrhea (6.1) 

•Cardiovascular risk reduction: The serious adverse events (≥ 1%) reported in cardiovascular risk reduction trials were intermittent claudication and skin ulcer (6.1)


To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Mylan at 1-877-446-3679 (1-877-4-INFO-RX) or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch. 








6.1 Clinical Trials Experience

Because clinical studies are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reactions rates observed in the clinical studies of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical studies of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice. 








Hypertension



Telmisartan tablets have been evaluated for safety in more than 3700 patients, including 1900 treated for over 6 months and more than 1300 for over one year. Adverse experiences have generally been mild and transient in nature and have infrequently required discontinuation of therapy. 
In placebo-controlled trials involving 1041 patients treated with various doses of telmisartan tablets (20 to 160 mg) monotherapy for up to 12 weeks, the overall incidence of adverse events was similar to that in patients treated with placebo. 
Adverse events occurring at an incidence of ≥ 1% in patients treated with telmisartan tablets and at a greater rate than in patients treated with placebo, irrespective of their causal association, are presented in Table 1. 

Table 1: Adverse Events Occurring at an Incidence of ≥ 1% in Patients Treated with Telmisartan Tablets and at a Greater Rate Than Patients Treated with Placebo








Telmisartan 

n = 1455 

%




Placebo 

n = 380 

%





Upper respiratory tract infection 


7


6




Back pain 


3


1




Sinusitis 


3


2




Diarrhea 


3


2




Pharyngitis 


1


0




 In addition to the adverse events in the table, the following events occurred at a rate of ≥ 1% but were at least as frequent in the placebo group: influenza-like symptoms, dyspepsia, myalgia, urinary tract infection, abdominal pain, headache, dizziness, pain, fatigue, coughing, hypertension, chest pain, nausea, and peripheral edema. Discontinuation of therapy because of adverse events was required in 2.8% of 1455 patients treated with telmisartan tablets and 6.1% of 380 placebo patients in placebo-controlled clinical trials. 
The incidence of adverse events was not dose-related and did not correlate with gender, age, or race of patients. 
The incidence of cough occurring with telmisartan in 6 placebo-controlled trials was identical to that noted for placebo-treated patients (1.6%). 
In addition to those listed above, adverse events that occurred in more than 0.3% of 3500 patients treated with telmisartan tablets monotherapy in controlled or open trials are listed below. It cannot be determined whether these events were causally related to telmisartan tablets: 

Autonomic Nervous System: impotence, increased sweating, flushing; 

Body as a Whole: allergy, fever, leg pain, malaise; 

Cardiovascular: palpitation, dependent edema, angina pectoris, tachycardia, leg edema, abnormal ECG; 

CNS: insomnia, somnolence, migraine, vertigo, paresthesia, involuntary muscle contractions, hypoesthesia; 

Gastrointestinal: flatulence, constipation, gastritis, vomiting, dry mouth, hemorrhoids, gastroenteritis, enteritis, gastroesophageal reflux, toothache, non-specific gastrointestinal disorders; 

Metabolic: gout, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes mellitus; 

Musculoskeletal: arthritis, arthralgia, leg cramps; 

Psychiatric: anxiety, depression, nervousness; 

Resistance Mechanism: infection, fungal infection, abscess, otitis media; 

Respiratory: asthma, bronchitis, rhinitis, dyspnea, epistaxis; 

Skin: dermatitis, rash, eczema, pruritus; 

Urinary: micturition frequency, cystitis; 

Vascular: cerebrovascular disorder; and 

Special Senses: abnormal vision, conjunctivitis, tinnitus, earache. 
During initial clinical studies, a single case of angioedema was reported (among a total of 3781 patients treated). 










Clinical Laboratory Findings



In placebo-controlled clinical trials, clinically relevant changes in standard laboratory test parameters were rarely associated with administration of telmisartan tablets. 






Hemoglobin

A greater than 2 g/dL decrease in hemoglobin was observed in 0.8% telmisartan patients compared with 0.3% placebo patients. No patients discontinued therapy because of anemia. 








Creatinine

A 0.5 mg/dL rise or greater in creatinine was observed in 0.4% telmisartan patients compared with 0.3% placebo patients. One telmisartan-treated patient discontinued therapy because of increases in creatinine and blood urea nitrogen.








Liver Enzymes

Occasional elevations of liver chemistries occurred in patients treated with telmisartan; all marked elevations occurred at a higher frequency with placebo. No telmisartan-treated patients discontinued therapy because of abnormal hepatic function.












Cardiovascular Risk Reduction






Because common adverse reactions were well characterized in studies of telmisartan in hypertension, only adverse events leading to discontinuation and serious adverse events were recorded in subsequent studies of telmisartan for cardiovascular risk reduction. In TRANSCEND (N = 5926, 4 years and 8 months of follow-up), discontinuations for adverse events were 8.4% on telmisartan and 7.6% on placebo. The only serious adverse events at least 1% more common on telmisartan than placebo were intermittent claudication (7% vs 6%) and skin ulcer (3% vs 2%).










6.2 Postmarketing Experience

The following adverse reactions have been identified during post-approval use of telmisartan tablets. Because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always possible to estimate reliably their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure. 


Blood and Lymphatic System Disorders:
 Anemia, eosinophilia, thrombocytopenia 


Gastrointestinal Disorders:
 Abdominal pain, diarrhea, dyspepsia, nausea 


General Disorders and Administration Site Conditions:
 Asthenia, chest pain, edema, face edema, fatigue, lower limb edema, pain, weakness 


Hepato-biliary:
 Abnormal hepatic function/liver disorder 


Immune System Disorders:
 Anaphylactic reaction, hypersensitivity 


Investigations:
 Increased CPK, uric acid increased 


Metabolism and Nutrition Disorders:
 Hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia (in diabetic patients), hyponatremia 


Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue Disorders:
 Myalgia 


Nervous System Disorders:
 Dizziness, headache, syncope 


Renal and Urinary Disorders:
 Renal impairment including acute renal failure 


Reproductive System and Breast Disorders:
 Erectile dysfunction 


Respiratory, Thoracic and Mediastinal Disorders:
 Coughing 


Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue Disorders:
 Angioedema (with fatal outcome), angioneurotic edema, drug eruption (toxic skin eruption mostly reported as toxicoderma, rash, and urticaria), erythema, sweating increased, urticaria 


Vascular Disorder:
 Hypotension (including postural hypotension)
Rare cases of rhabdomyolysis have been reported in patients receiving angiotensin II receptor blockers, including telmisartan tablets.
WARNING: FETAL TOXICITY 



•
When pregnancy is detected, discontinue telmisartan tablets as soon as possible [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Use in Specific Populations (8.1)].


•
Drugs that act directly on the renin-angiotensin system can cause injury and death to the developing fetus [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Use in Specific Populations (8.1)].







WARNING: FETAL TOXICITY 


See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning.




•
When pregnancy is detected, discontinue telmisartan tablets as soon as possible (5.1, 8.1)


•
Drugs that act directly on the renin-angiotensin system can cause injury and death to the developing fetus (5.1, 8.1)
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS






•Avoid fetal or neonatal exposure (5.1) 

•Hypotension: Correct any volume or salt depletion before initiating therapy. Observe for signs and symptoms of hypotension (5.2) 

•Monitor carefully in patients with impaired hepatic (5.4) or renal function (5.5) 

•Avoid concomitant use of an ACE inhibitor and angiotensin receptor blocker (5.6) 








5.1 Fetal Toxicity

Use of drugs that act on the renin-angiotensin system during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy reduces fetal renal function and increases fetal and neonatal morbidity and death. Resulting oligohydramnios can be associated with fetal lung hypoplasia and skeletal deformations. Potential neonatal adverse effects include skull hypoplasia, anuria, hypotension, renal failure, and death. When pregnancy is detected, discontinue telmisartan tablets as soon as possible [see Use in Specific Populations (8.1)].








5.2 Hypotension

In patients with an activated renin-angiotensin system, such as volume- or salt-depleted patients (e.g., those being treated with high doses of diuretics), symptomatic hypotension may occur after initiation of therapy with telmisartan tablets. Either correct this condition prior to administration of telmisartan tablets, or start treatment under close medical supervision with a reduced dose. 
If hypotension does occur, the patient should be placed in the supine position and, if necessary, given an intravenous infusion of normal saline. A transient hypotensive response is not a contraindication to further treatment, which usually can be continued without difficulty once the blood pressure has stabilized. 








5.3 Hyperkalemia

Hyperkalemia may occur in patients on ARBs, particularly in patients with advanced renal impairment, heart failure, on renal replacement therapy, or on potassium supplements, potassium-sparing diuretics, potassium-containing salt substitutes or other drugs that increase potassium levels. Consider periodic determinations of serum electrolytes to detect possible electrolyte imbalances, particularly in patients at risk. 








5.4 Impaired Hepatic Function

As the majority of telmisartan is eliminated by biliary excretion, patients with biliary obstructive disorders or hepatic insufficiency can be expected to have reduced clearance. Initiate telmisartan at low doses and titrate slowly in these patients [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].








5.5 Impaired Renal Function

As a consequence of inhibiting the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, anticipate changes in renal function in susceptible individuals. In patients whose renal function may depend on the activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (e.g., patients with severe congestive heart failure or renal dysfunction), treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor antagonists has been associated with oliguria and/or progressive azotemia and (rarely) with acute renal failure and/or death. Similar results have been reported with telmisartan tablets [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
In studies of ACE inhibitors in patients with unilateral or bilateral renal artery stenosis, increases in serum creatinine or blood urea nitrogen were observed. There has been no long-term use of telmisartan tablets in patients with unilateral or bilateral renal artery stenosis, but anticipate an effect similar to that seen with ACE inhibitors. 








5.6 Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System (RAS)

Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin-receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy.
The ONTARGET trial enrolled 25,620 patients ≥ 55 years old with atherosclerotic disease or diabetes with end-organ damage, randomizing them to telmisartan only, ramipril only, or the combination, and followed them for a median of 56 months. Patients receiving the combination of telmisartan tablets and ramipril did not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy, but experienced an increased incidence of renal dysfunction (e.g., acute renal failure) compared with groups receiving telmisartan alone or ramipril alone. 
In most patients no benefit has been associated with using two RAS inhibitors concomitantly. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function, and electrolytes in patients on telmisartan tablets and other agents that affect the RAS.
Do not co-administer aliskiren with telmisartan tablets in patients with diabetes. Avoid concomitant use of aliskiren with telmisartan tablets in patients with renal impairment (GFR < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2).
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS






•Lactation: Do not breastfeed during treatment with telmisartan tablets (8.2)  

•Geriatric Patients: No overall difference in efficacy or safety vs younger patients, but greater sensitivity of some older individuals cannot be ruled out (8.5) 








8.1 Pregnancy







Risk Summary






Telmisartan tablets can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. Use of drugs that act on the renin-angiotensin system during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy reduces fetal renal function and increases fetal and neonatal morbidity and death (see Clinical Considerations). Most epidemiologic studies examining fetal abnormalities after exposure to antihypertensive use in the first trimester have not distinguished drugs affecting the renin-angiotensin system from other antihypertensive agents. Studies in rats and rabbits with telmisartan showed fetotoxicity only at maternally toxic doses (see Data). When pregnancy is detected, discontinue telmisartan tablets as soon as possible. 
The estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population is unknown. All pregnancies have a background risk of birth defect, loss, or other adverse outcomes. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2% to 4% and 15% to 20%, respectively.










Clinical Considerations










Disease-Associated Maternal and/or Embryo/Fetal Risk 

Hypertension in pregnancy increases the maternal risk for pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes, premature delivery, and delivery complications (e.g., need for cesarean section, and post-partum hemorrhage). Hypertension increases the fetal risk for intrauterine growth restriction and intrauterine death. Pregnant women with hypertension should be carefully monitored and managed accordingly.








Fetal/Neonatal Adverse Reactions 

Use of drugs that act on the RAS in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy can result in the following: oligohydramnios, reduced fetal renal function leading to anuria and renal failure, fetal lung hypoplasia, skeletal deformations, including skull hypoplasia, hypotension, and death. In the unusual case that there is no appropriate alternative to therapy with drugs affecting the renin-angiotensin system for a particular patient, apprise the mother of the potential risk to the fetus.
In patients taking telmisartan tablets during pregnancy, perform serial ultrasound examinations to assess the intra-amniotic environment. Fetal testing may be appropriate, based on the week of gestation. If oligohydramnios is observed, discontinue telmisartan tablets, unless they are considered lifesaving for the mother. Patients and physicians should be aware, however, that oligohydramnios may not appear until after the fetus has sustained irreversible injury.
Closely observe infants with histories of in utero exposure to telmisartan for hypotension, oliguria, and hyperkalemia. If oliguria or hypotension occurs, support blood pressure and renal perfusion. Exchange transfusions or dialysis may be required as a means of reversing hypotension and/or substituting for disordered renal function [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].












Data










Animal Data 

No teratogenic effects were observed when telmisartan was administered to pregnant rats at oral doses of up to 50 mg/kg/day and to pregnant rabbits at oral doses up to 45 mg/kg/day. In rabbits, embryolethality associated with maternal toxicity (reduced body weight gain and food consumption) was observed at 45 mg/kg/day [about 12 times the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD) of 80 mg on a mg/m2 basis]. In rats, maternally toxic (reduction in body weight gain and food consumption) telmisartan doses of 15 mg/kg/day (about 1.9 times the MRHD on a mg/m2 basis), administered during late gestation and lactation, were observed to produce adverse effects in neonates, including reduced viability, low birth weight, delayed maturation, and decreased weight gain. The no-observed-effect doses for developmental toxicity in rats and rabbits, 5 and 15 mg/kg/day, respectively, are about 0.64 and 3.7 times, on a mg/m2 basis, the maximum recommended human dose of telmisartan (80 mg/day). 












8.2 Lactation 







Risk Summary






There is no information regarding the presence of telmisartan in human milk, the effects on the breastfed infant, or the effects on milk production. Telmisartan is present in the milk of lactating rats (see Data). Because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in the breastfed infant including hypotension, hyperkalemia and renal impairment, advise a nursing woman not to breastfeed during treatment with telmisartan tablets.










Data






Telmisartan was present in the milk of lactating rats at concentrations 1.5 to 2 times those found in plasma from 4 to 8 hours after administration. 










8.4 Pediatric Use

Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been established [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].








Neonates with a History of In Utero Exposure to Telmisartan



If oliguria or hypotension occurs, support blood pressure and renal perfusion. Exchange transfusions or dialysis may be required as a means of reversing hypotension and/or substituting for disordered renal function.










8.5 Geriatric Use

Of the total number of patients receiving telmisartan tablets in hypertension clinical studies, 551 (19%) were 65 to 74 years of age and 130 (4%) were 75 years or older. No overall differences in effectiveness and safety were observed in these patients compared to younger patients and other reported clinical experience has not identified differences in responses between the elderly and younger patients, but greater sensitivity of some older individuals cannot be ruled out. 
Of the total number of patients receiving telmisartan tablets in the cardiovascular risk reduction study (ONTARGET), the percentage of patients ≥ 65 to < 75 years of age was 42%; 15% of patients were ≥ 75 years old. No overall differences in effectiveness and safety were observed in these patients compared to younger patients and other reported clinical experience has not identified differences in responses between the elderly and younger patients, but greater sensitivity of some older individuals cannot be ruled out.








8.6 Hepatic Insufficiency

Monitor carefully and uptitrate slowly in patients with biliary obstructive disorders or hepatic insufficiency [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
10 OVERDOSAGE

Limited data are available with regard to overdosage in humans. The most likely manifestation of overdosage with telmisartan tablets would be hypotension, dizziness and tachycardia; bradycardia could occur from parasympathetic (vagal) stimulation. If symptomatic hypotension should occur, supportive treatment should be instituted. Telmisartan is not removed by hemofiltration and is not dialyzable.